so, i called myself pip, and came to be called pip.
joe gargery, who married the blacksmith.
ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as the riverwound, twenty miles of the sea.
my first most vivid and broad impressionof the identity of things seems to me to have been gained on a memorableraw afternoon towards evening.
a manwith no hat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tied round hishead.
the man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down, andemptied my pockets.
there was nothing in them but a piece of bread.
he started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over his shoulder.
and looked down at his leg.
youbring the lot to me, at that old battery over yonder.
you do it, and younever dare to say a word or dare to make a sign concerning your havingseen such a person as me, or any person sumever, and you shall be let tolive.
you fail, or you go from my words in any partickler, no matter howsmall it is, and your heart and your liver shall be tore out, roasted,and ate.
that youngman hears the words i speak.
that young man has a secret way pecooliarto himself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and at his liver.
itis in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that young man.
aboy may lock his door, may be warm in bed, may tuck himself up, may drawthe clothes over his head, may think himself comfortable and safe, butthat young man will softly creep and creep his way to him and tear himopen.
i am a keeping that young man from harming of you at the presentmoment, with great difficulty.
i find it wery hard to hold that youngman off of your inside.
i said so, and he took me down.
as i saw him go, picking his way among thenettles, and among the brambles that bound the green mounds, he lookedin my young eyes as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people,stretching up cautiously out of their graves, to get a twist upon hisankle and pull him in.
when he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a man whoselegs were numbed and stiff, and then turned round to look for me.
when isaw him turning, i set my face towards home, and made the best use ofmy legs.
the man was limping ontowards this latter, as if he were the pirate come to life, and comedown, and going back to hook himself up again.
i looked allround for the horrible young man, and could see no signs of him.
but nowi was frightened again, and ran home without stopping.
chapter iimy sister, mrs.
joewas a fair man, with curls of flaxen hair on each side of his smoothface, and with eyes of such a very undecided blue that they seemedto have somehow got mixed with their own whites.
she was talland bony, and almost always wore a coarse apron, fastened over herfigure behind with two loops, and having a square impregnable bib infront, that was stuck full of pins and needles.
she made it a powerfulmerit in herself, and a strong reproach against joe, that she wore thisapron so much.
when i ranhome from the churchyard, the forge was shut up, and joe was sittingalone in the kitchen.
joe has been out a dozen times, looking for you, pip.
joe, throwing the door wide open,and finding an obstruction behind it, immediately divined the cause, andapplied tickler to its further investigation.
joe, stamping herfoot.
for the fugitive out on the marshes with the ironed leg, themysterious young man, the file, the food, and the dreadful pledge i wasunder to commit a larceny on those sheltering premises, rose before mein the avenging coals.
joe, restoring tickler to his station.
joe about withhis blue eyes, as his manner always was at squally times.
my sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread and butter for us,that never varied.
on the present occasion, though i was hungry, i dared not eat myslice.
i felt that i must have something in reserve for my dreadfulacquaintance, and his ally the still more dreadful young man.
thereforei resolved to put my hunk of bread and butter down the leg of mytrousers.
the effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this purpose ifound to be quite awful.
it was as if i had to make up my mind to leapfrom the top of a high house, or plunge into a great depth of water.
and it was made the more difficult by the unconscious joe.
at last, i desperatelyconsidered that the thing i contemplated must be done, and that ithad best be done in the least improbable manner consistent with thecircumstances.
i took advantage of a moment when joe had just looked atme, and got my bread and butter down my leg.
he turned it about in his mouth much longer thanusual, pondering over it a good deal, and after all gulped it down likea pill.
he was about to take another bite, and had just got his head onone side for a good purchase on it, when his eye fell on me, and he sawthat my bread and butter was gone.
at thebest of times, so much of this elixir was administered to me as a choicerestorative, that i was conscious of going about, smelling like a newfence.
on this particular evening the urgency of my case demanded apint of this mixture, which was poured down my throat, for my greatercomfort, while mrs.
joe held my head under her arm, as a boot wouldbe held in a bootjack.
the guilty knowledge that i was going to rob mrs.
happily i slipped away,and deposited that part of my conscience in my garret bedroom.
and they fired warning of him.
but she never was politeunless there was company.
but i could make nothing ofthe word.
it was too much for mrs.
joe, who immediately rose.
it would be blame to me and not praise, if i had.
i was clearly on my way there.
i had begun by askingquestions, and i was going to rob mrs.
since that time, which is far enough away now, i have often thoughtthat few people know what secrecy there is in the young under terror.
no matter how unreasonable the terror, so that it be terror.
i was afraid to sleep, even if i had beeninclined, for i knew that at the first faint dawn of morning i must robthe pantry.
i had no time for verification, no time for selection,no time for anything, for i had no time to spare.
i was nearly going away without the pie, but i was tempted to mountupon a shelf, to look what it was that was put away so carefully in acovered earthenware dish in a corner, and i found it was the pie, andi took it in the hope that it was not intended for early use, and wouldnot be missed for some time.
then i put the fastenings as i had found them, opened the door at whichi had entered when i ran home last night, shut it, and ran for the mistymarshes.
chapter iiiit was a rimy morning, and very damp.
then, as i looked upat it, while it dripped, it seemed to my oppressed conscience like aphantom devoting me to the hulks.
the mist was heavier yet when i got out upon the marshes, so thatinstead of my running at everything, everything seemed to run at me.
this was very disagreeable to a guilty mind.
making my way along here with all despatch, i had just crossed aditch which i knew to be very near the battery, and had just scrambledup the mound beyond the ditch, when i saw the man sitting before me.
his back was towards me, and he had his arms folded, and was noddingforward, heavy with sleep.
i thought he would be more glad if i came upon him with his breakfast,in that unexpected manner, so i went forward softly and touched him onthe shoulder.
i dare say i should have felt a pain in my liver, too, if i hadknown where it was.
he was awfullycold, to be sure.
i half expected to see him drop down before my faceand die of deadly cold.
his eyes looked so awfully hungry too, that wheni handed him the file and he laid it down on the grass, it occurred tome he would have tried to eat it, if he had not seen my bundle.
he didnot turn me upside down this time to get at what i had, but left meright side upwards while i opened the bundle and emptied my pockets.
he shivered all the while so violently, that it was quiteas much as he could do to keep the neck of the bottle between his teeth,without biting it off.
and he smeared his ragged rough sleeve over hiseyes.
the man took strong sharp sudden bites, just like the dog.
he was altogether too unsettled in his mind over it, to appreciateit comfortably i thought, or to have anybody to dine with him, withoutmaking a chop with his jaws at the visitor.
in all of which particularshe was very like the dog.
that you spoke of.
that was hid with you.
the man stopped eating, and regarded me with the keenest scrutiny andthe greatest surprise.
but he was down on the rank wetgrass, filing at his iron like a madman, and not minding me or mindinghis own leg, which had an old chafe upon it and was bloody, but which hehandled as roughly as if it had no more feeling in it than the file.
iwas very much afraid of him again, now that he had worked himself intothis fierce hurry, and i was likewise very much afraid of keeping awayfrom home any longer.
i told him i must go, but he took no notice, soi thought the best thing i could do was to slip off.
the last i sawof him, his head was bent over his knee and he was working hard at hisfetter, muttering impatient imprecations at it and at his leg.
the lasti heard of him, i stopped in the mist to listen, and the file was stillgoing.
chapter ivi fully expected to find a constable in the kitchen, waiting to take meup.
but not only was there no constable there, but no discovery had yetbeen made of the robbery.
i said i had been down to hear the carols.
joe darted a look at him, and, when her eyeswere withdrawn, secretly crossed his two forefingers, and exhibited themto me, as our token that mrs.
joe was in a cross temper.
this was somuch her normal state, that joe and i would often, for weeks together,be, as to our fingers, like monumental crusaders as to their legs.
we were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of pickled pork andgreens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls.
inthe meantime, mrs.
joe was a very clean housekeeper, but had an exquisite art ofmaking her cleanliness more uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirtitself.
cleanliness is next to godliness, and some people do the same bytheir religion.
my sister, having so much to do, was going to church vicariously, thatis to say, joe and i were going.
on the present festive occasionhe emerged from his room, when the blithe bells were going, the pictureof misery, in a full suit of sunday penitentials.
i was always treated as if i had insisted on being born in oppositionto the dictates of reason, religion, and morality, and against thedissuading arguments of my best friends.
even when i was taken to havea new suit of clothes, the tailor had orders to make them like a kind ofreformatory, and on no account to let me have the free use of my limbs.
joe and i going to church, therefore, must have been a moving spectaclefor compassionate minds.
yet, what i suffered outside was nothing towhat i underwent within.
the terrors that had assailed me whenevermrs.
joe had gone near the pantry, or out of the room, were only to beequalled by the remorse with which my mind dwelt on what my hands haddone.
under the weight of my wicked secret, i pondered whether thechurch would be powerful enough to shield me from the vengeance of theterrible young man, if i divulged to that establishment.
i am far from being sure that imight not have astonished our small congregation by resorting to thisextreme measure, but for its being christmas day and no sunday.
hubblethe wheelwright and mrs.
when joe and i got home, we found the table laid, andmrs.
and still, not a word of the robbery.
the time came, without bringing with it any relief to my feelings, andthe company came.
wopsle, nextto mr.
hubble, and last of all to uncle pumblechook.
i wasnot allowed to call him uncle, under the severest penalties.
every christmas day, mrs.
my sister wasuncommonly lively on the present occasion, and indeed was generally moregracious in the society of mrs.
hubble than in other company.
they seemed to think the opportunitylost, if they failed to point the conversation at me, every now andthen, and stick the point into me.
i might have been an unfortunatelittle bull in a spanish arena, i got so smartingly touched up by thesemoral goads.
it began the moment we sat down to dinner.
a little later on in the dinner, mr.
the gluttony of swine is put before us,as an example to the young.
joe gave me some more gravy.
wopsle, nodding towards the dish.
no bringing up by hand then.
hubble,commiserating my sister.
i think the romans must have aggravated one another very much, withtheir noses.
perhaps, they became the restless people they were, inconsequence.
all this time mrs.
joe and joe werebriskly clearing the table for the pie and pudding.
always holding tight by the leg of thetable with my hands and feet, i saw the miserable creature finger hisglass playfully, take it up, smile, throw his head back, and drinkthe brandy off.
i held on tight, while mrs.
joe and joe ran to him.
i knew he would beworse by and by.
i moved the table, like a medium of the present day, bythe vigor of my unseen hold upon it.
for the time being at least, i was saved.
i still held on to theleg of the table, but clutched it now with the fervor of gratitude.
by degrees, i became calm enough to release my grasp and partake ofpudding.
pumblechook partook of pudding.
all partook of pudding.
the course terminated, and mr.
pumblechook had begun to beam under thegenial influence of gin and water.
i foresaw what was coming, and i felt that this time i really was gone.
i heard her steps proceed to the pantry.
pumblechook balance his knife.
i saw reawakening appetite in theroman nostrils of mr.
i felt that icould bear no more, and that i must run away.
i released the leg of thetable, and ran for my life.
it wasthe sergeant who had spoken to me, and he was now looking round at thecompany, with his handcuffs invitingly extended towards them in hisright hand, and his left on my shoulder.
all these things i saw without then knowing that i saw them, for iwas in an agony of apprehension.
but beginning to perceive that thehandcuffs were not for me, and that the military had so far got thebetter of the pie as to put it in the background, i collected a littlemore of my scattered wits.
pumblechook, as to a man whose appreciative powers justified theinference that he was equal to the time.
a little beforedusk, my orders are.
nobody thought ofme.
one of the soldiers opened its woodenwindows, another lighted the fire, another turned to at the bellows, therest stood round the blaze, which was soon roaring.
then joe began tohammer and clink, hammer and clink, and we all looked on.
the interest of the impending pursuit not only absorbed the generalattention, but even made my sister liberal.
she drew a pitcher of beerfrom the cask for the soldiers, and invited the sergeant to take a glassof brandy.
pumblechook, with his former laugh.
i noticed that mr.
pumblechook in his hospitalityappeared to forget that he had made a present of the wine, but took thebottle from mrs.
joe and had all the credit of handing it about in agush of joviality.
even i got some.
and he was so very free of the winethat he even called for the other bottle, and handed that about with thesame liberality, when the first was gone.
as i watched them while they all stood clustering about the forge,enjoying themselves so much, i thought what terrible good sauce fora dinner my fugitive friend on the marshes was.
they had not enjoyedthemselves a quarter so much, before the entertainment was brightenedwith the excitement he furnished.
as joegot on his coat, he mustered courage to propose that some of us shouldgo down with the soldiers and see what came of the hunt.
pumblechookand mr.
wopsle said he would go, if joe would.
joe said he was agreeable,and would take me, if mrs.
we never should have got leaveto go, i am sure, but for mrs.
his men resumed their muskets and fell in.
wopsle, joe, and i, received strict charge to keep in the rear, andto speak no word after we reached the marshes.
afew faces hurried to glowing windows and looked after us, but none cameout.
they came in again without findinganything, and then we struck out on the open marshes, through the gateat the side of the churchyard.
a bitter sleet came rattling against ushere on the east wind, and joe took me on his back.
wopsle not to tumble on his roman nose, andto keep up with us.
the soldiers were in front of us, extending into apretty wide line with an interval between man and man.
we were takingthe course i had begun with, and from which i had diverged in the mist.
either the mist was not out again yet, or the wind had dispelled it.
under the low red glare of sunset, the beacon, and the gibbet, and themound of the battery, and the opposite shore of the river, were plain,though all of a watery lead color.
i could see none, i couldhear none.
the soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old battery, and wewere moving on a little way behind them, when, all of a sudden, we allstopped.
for there had reached us on the wings of the wind and rain, along shout.
it was repeated.
it was at a distance towards the east, butit was long and loud.
to this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking undertheir breath, when joe and i came up.
as we came nearer to the shouting, it became more andmore apparent that it was made by more than one voice.
sometimes, itseemed to stop altogether, and then the soldiers stopped.
when it brokeout again, the soldiers made for it at a greater rate than ever, and weafter them.
and when it hadcome to this, the soldiers ran like deer, and joe too.
the sergeant ran in first, when we had run the noise quite down, and twoof his men ran in close upon him.
their pieces were cocked and levelledwhen we all ran in.
he could not so much as get his breath to speak, until they were bothseparately handcuffed, but leaned upon a soldier to keep himself fromfalling.
now, the hulks has got its gentleman again, through me.
i should have been a deadman if you had not come up.
i defy him to do it.
he never looked at me.
at that point, my convictbecame so frantically exasperated, that he would have rushed upon himbut for the interposition of the soldiers.
i looked at him eagerly whenhe looked at me, and slightly moved my hands and shook my head.
i hadbeen waiting for him to see me that i might try to assure him of myinnocence.
it was not at all expressed to me that he even comprehendedmy intention, for he gave me a look that i did not understand, and itall passed in a moment.
but if he had looked at me for an hour or fora day, i could not have remembered his face ever afterwards, as havingbeen more attentive.
the soldier with the basket soon got a light, and lighted three or fourtorches, and took one himself and distributed the others.
it had beenalmost dark before, but now it seemed quite dark, and soon afterwardsvery dark.
before we departed from that spot, four soldiers standing ina ring, fired twice into the air.
presently we saw other torches kindledat some distance behind us, and others on the marshes on the oppositebank of the river.
wopsle had been for going back, but joe was resolved to see it out, sowe went on with the party.
wheni looked round, i could see the other lights coming in after us.
thetorches we carried dropped great blotches of fire upon the track, andi could see those, too, lying smoking and flaring.
i could see nothingelse but black darkness.
our lights warmed the air about us with theirpitchy blaze, and the two prisoners seemed rather to like that, as theylimped along in the midst of the muskets.
there was a guard in the hut, and they challenged,and the sergeant answered.
then, we went into the hut, where there wasa smell of tobacco and whitewash, and a bright fire, and a lamp, anda stand of muskets, and a drum, and a low wooden bedstead, like anovergrown mangle without the machinery, capable of holding about a dozensoldiers all at once.
the sergeant made somekind of report, and some entry in a book, and then the convict whom icall the other convict was drafted off with his guard, to go on boardfirst.
my convict never looked at me, except that once.
while we stood in thehut, he stood before the fire looking thoughtfully at it, or putting uphis feet by turns upon the hob, and looking thoughtfully at them as ifhe pitied them for their recent adventures.
it may prevent somepersons laying under suspicion alonger me.
we saw the boat go alongside, and we sawhim taken up the side and disappear.
then, the ends of the torches wereflung hissing into the water, and went out, as if it were all over withhim.
i do not recall that i felt any tenderness of conscience in referenceto mrs.
joe, when the fear of being found out was lifted off me.
yet i did not, and for the reason that i mistrusted thatif i did, he would think me worse than i was.
i morbidly represented to myself that if joe knew it, i neverafterwards could see him at the fireside feeling his fair whisker,without thinking that he was meditating on it.
that, if joe knew it, andat any subsequent period of our joint domestic life remarked that hisbeer was flat or thick, the conviction that he suspected tar in it,would bring a rush of blood to my face.
in a word, i was too cowardlyto do what i knew to be right, as i had been too cowardly to avoid doingwhat i knew to be wrong.
i had had no intercourse with the world atthat time, and i imitated none of its many inhabitants who act in thismanner.
quite an untaught genius, i made the discovery of the line ofaction for myself.
he must have had a tiresomejourney of it, for mr.
wopsle, being knocked up, was in such a very badtemper that if the church had been thrown open, he would probably haveexcommunicated the whole expedition, beginning with joe and myself.
inhis lay capacity, he persisted in sitting down in the damp to suchan insane extent, that when his coat was taken off to be dried at thekitchen fire, the circumstantial evidence on his trousers would havehanged him, if it had been a capital offence.
by that time, i was staggering on the kitchen floor like a littledrunkard, through having been newly set upon my feet, and through havingbeen fast asleep, and through waking in the heat and lights and noise oftongues.
my state of mind, asi have described it, began before i was up in the morning, and lastedlong after the subject had died out, and had ceased to be mentionedsaving on exceptional occasions.
chapter viiat the time when i stood in the churchyard reading the familytombstones, i had just enough learning to be able to spell them out.
when i was old enough, i was to be apprenticed to joe, and until i couldassume that dignity i was not to be what mrs.
i have an impression that they were to be contributedeventually towards the liquidation of the national debt, but i know ihad no hope of any personal participation in the treasure.
she rented a small cottage, and mr.
wopsle had the room upstairs, where we students used to overhear himreading aloud in a most dignified and terrific manner, and occasionallybumping on the ceiling.
there was a fiction that mr.
it was not with me then,as it was in later life, when i fell into the society of the passions,and compared them with collins and wopsle, rather to the disadvantage ofboth gentlemen.
onsundays, she went to church elaborated.
much of my unassisted self, and more by the help of biddy than of mr.
after that i fell among those thieves, the nine figures, whoseemed every evening to do something new to disguise themselves andbaffle recognition.
but, at last i began, in a purblind groping way, toread, write, and cipher, on the very smallest scale.
one night i was sitting in the chimney corner with my slate, expendinggreat efforts on the production of a letter to joe.
i think it must havebeen a full year after our hunt upon the marshes, for it was a longtime after, and it was winter and a hard frost.
my father, pip, he were givento drink, and when he were overtook with drink, he hammered away atmy mother, most onmerciful.
and then he took us home and hammered us.
in time i were able to keep him, and i kep him till he went off in apurple leptic fit.
i made it in a moment.
it was likestriking out a horseshoe complete, in a single blow.
not to mentionbearers, all the money that could be spared were wanted for my mother.
she were in poor elth, and quite broke.
very kind of her too, all the folks said, and i said,along with all the folks.
it must be done, as i may say, on the sly.
joewas out on one of these expeditions.
it was a dry cold night, and the wind blewkeenly, and the frost was white and hard.
and then i looked at the stars, andconsidered how awful it would be for a man to turn his face up to themas he froze to death, and see no help or pity in all the glitteringmultitude.
we got a chair out, readyfor mrs.
when we had completed these preparations, theydrove up, wrapped to the eyes.
joe was soon landed, and unclepumblechook was soon down too, covering the mare with a cloth, and wewere soon all in the kitchen, carrying so much cold air in with us thatit seemed to drive all the heat out of the fire.
buti have my fears.
you mayconsider that you do, but you do not, joseph.
i was then deliveredover to mr.
it was in the early morning after my arrival that i entertained thisspeculation.
on the previous night, i had been sent straight to bed inan attic with a sloping roof, which was so low in the corner where thebedstead was, that i calculated the tiles as being within a foot of myeyebrows.
in the same early morning, i discovered a singular affinitybetween seeds and corduroys.
the same opportunity served me for noticing that mr.
pumblechook appeared to conduct his business by looking across thestreet at the saddler, who appeared to transact his business by keepinghis eye on the coachmaker, who appeared to get on in life by putting hishands in his pockets and contemplating the baker, who in his turn foldedhis arms and stared at the grocer, who stood at his door and yawned atthe chemist.
i considered mr.
pumblechook wretched company.
no brewingwas going on in it, and none seemed to have gone on for a long longtime.
pumblechook was coming in also, when she stopped him with the gate.
pumblechook,discomfited.
pumblechook, though in a condition of ruffled dignity, could notprotest.
my young conductress locked the gate, and we went across the courtyard.
it was paved and clean, but grass was growing in every crevice.
it meant, when itwas given, that whoever had this house could want nothing else.
theymust have been easily satisfied in those days, i should think.
she took it up, and we went through more passages and up a staircase,and still it was all dark, and only the candle lighted us.
this was very uncomfortable, and i was half afraid.
however, the onlything to be done being to knock at the door, i knocked, and was toldfrom within to enter.
i entered, therefore, and found myself in a prettylarge room, well lighted with wax candles.
no glimpse of daylight was tobe seen in it.
whether i should have made out this object so soon if there had been nofine lady sitting at it, i cannot say.
her shoes were white.
and she had a long white veil dependentfrom her hair, and she had bridal flowers in her hair, but her hair waswhite.
some bright jewels sparkled on her neck and on her hands, andsome other jewels lay sparkling on the table.
it was not in the first few moments that i saw all these things, thoughi saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed.
but isaw that everything within my view which ought to be white, had beenwhite long ago, and had lost its lustre and was faded and yellow.
i sawthat the bride within the bridal dress had withered like the dress, andlike the flowers, and had no brightness left but the brightness of hersunken eyes.
i saw that the dress had been put upon the rounded figureof a young woman, and that the figure upon which it now hung loose hadshrunk to skin and bone.
once, i had been taken to see some ghastlywaxwork at the fair, representing i know not what impossible personagelying in state.
once, i had been taken to one of our old marsh churchesto see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug out ofa vault under the church pavement.
now, waxwork and skeleton seemed tohave dark eyes that moved and looked at me.
i should have cried out, ifi could.
afterwards she kepther hands there for a little while, and slowly took them away as if theywere heavy.
but she answered at last, and her light camealong the dark passage like a star.
miss havisham beckoned her to come close, and took up a jewel from thetable, and tried its effect upon her fair young bosom and against herpretty brown hair.
let me see you play cards with this boy.
so we sat down to cards.
it was then i began to understand that everything in the room hadstopped, like the watch and the clock, a long time ago.
i noticed thatmiss havisham put down the jewel exactly on the spot from which she hadtaken it up.
i glanced down at the foot from which the shoe was absent,and saw that the silk stocking on it, once white, now yellow, had beentrodden ragged.
her contempt for me was sostrong, that it became infectious, and i caught it.
she won the game, and i dealt.
i played the game to an end with estella, and she beggared me.
shethrew the cards down on the table when she had won them all, as if shedespised them for having been won of me.
come again after six days.
let him have something to eat, and let him roamand look about him while he eats.
the rush of the daylight quite confounded me,and made me feel as if i had been in the candlelight of the strange roommany hours.
i took the opportunity of being alone in the courtyard to look at mycoarse hands and my common boots.
my opinion of those accessories wasnot favorable.
they had never troubled me before, but they troubledme now, as vulgar appendages.
i wished joe had been rather more genteelly brought up, and theni should have been so too.
she came back, with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer.
sheput the mug down on the stones of the yard, and gave me the breadand meat without looking at me, as insolently as if i were a dog indisgrace.
the moment they sprang there, thegirl looked at me with a quick delight in having been the cause of them.
in the little world inwhich children have their existence whosoever brings them up, there isnothing so finely perceived and so finely felt as injustice.
withinmyself, i had sustained, from my babyhood, a perpetual conflict withinjustice.
i had known, from the time when i could speak, that mysister, in her capricious and violent coercion, was unjust to me.
i hadcherished a profound conviction that her bringing me up by hand gave herno right to bring me up by jerks.
i got rid of my injured feelings for the time by kicking them into thebrewery wall, and twisting them out of my hair, and then i smoothed myface with my sleeve, and came from behind the gate.
the bread and meatwere acceptable, and the beer was warming and tingling, and i was soonin spirits to look about me.
all the uses and scents of the brewery might have evaporated with itslast reek of smoke.
but sheseemed to be everywhere.
for when i yielded to the temptation presentedby the casks, and began to walk on them, i saw her walking on them atthe end of the yard of casks.
she had her back towards me, and held herpretty brown hair spread out in her two hands, and never looked round,and passed out of my view directly.
when i first went into it,and, rather oppressed by its gloom, stood near the door looking aboutme, i saw her pass among the extinguished fires, and ascend some lightiron stairs, and go out by a gallery high overhead, as if she were goingout into the sky.
it was in this place, and at this moment, that a strange thing happenedto my fancy.
i thought it a strange thing then, and i thought it astranger thing long afterwards.
in the terror of seeing the figure,and in the terror of being certain that it had not been there a momentbefore, i at first ran from it, and then ran towards it.
and my terrorwas greatest of all when i found no figure there.
even with those aids, i might not have come to myself as soonas i did, but that i saw estella approaching with the keys, to letme out.
she gave me a triumphant glance in passing me, as if she rejoiced thatmy hands were so coarse and my boots were so thick, and she opened thegate, and stood holding it.
i was passing out without looking at her,when she touched me with a taunting hand.
i went straight to mr.
and i soon found myselfgetting heavily bumped from behind in the nape of the neck and the smallof the back, and having my face ignominiously shoved against the kitchenwall, because i did not answer those questions at sufficient length.
consequently, i said as little as i could,and had my face shoved against the kitchen wall.
and the mere sight of the torment, with his fishy eyes and mouthopen, his sandy hair inquisitively on end, and his waistcoat heavingwith windy arithmetic, made me vicious in my reticence.
pumblechook repeated.
anyhow, with whitewash from the wall on my forehead, myobstinacy was adamantine.
and although my sister instantly boxed my ears, it washighly gratifying to me to see that the answer spoilt his joke, andbrought him to a dead stop.
pumblechook conceitedly.
pumblechook and mrs.
and we all hadcake and wine on gold plates.
and i got up behind the coach to eat mine,because she told me to.
pumblechook and mrs.
joe stared at one another again, in utteramazement.
howsever, the boy went there to play.
and then we all waved our swords and hurrahed.
and there was no daylight in the room, but it was all lighted upwith candles.
pumblechook, with a grave nod.
if they had asked me any more questions, i should undoubtedly havebetrayed myself, for i was even then on the point of mentioning thatthere was a balloon in the yard, and should have hazarded the statementbut for my invention being divided between that phenomenon and a bearin the brewery.
they were so much occupied, however, in discussing themarvels i had already presented for their consideration, that i escaped.
the subject still held them when joe came in from his work to have a cupof tea.
to whom my sister, more for the relief of her own mind than forthe gratification of his, related my pretended experiences.
pumblechook had driven off, and when my sister was washing up,i stole into the forge to joe, and remained by him until he had done forthe night.
this was a case of metaphysics, at least as difficult for joe to dealwith as for me.
but joe took the case altogether out of the region ofmetaphysics, and by that means vanquished it.
you are oncommon in some things.
you think much of me.
lookee here, pip, at what is said to you by atrue friend.
which this to you the true friend say.
i thought how joe and my sister were then sittingin the kitchen, and how i had come up to bed from the kitchen, and howmiss havisham and estella never sat in a kitchen, but were far above thelevel of such common doings.
that was a memorable day to me, for it made great changes in me.
but itis the same with any life.
imagine one selected day struck out of it,and think how different its course would have been.
pause you who readthis, and think for a moment of the long chain of iron or gold,of thorns or flowers, that would never have bound you, but for theformation of the first link on one memorable day.
chapter xthe felicitous idea occurred to me a morning or two later when i woke,that the best step i could take towards making myself uncommon was toget out of biddy everything she knew.
in pursuance of this luminousconception i mentioned to biddy when i went to mr.
biddy, who was the most obliging of girls,immediately said she would, and indeed began to carry out her promisewithin five minutes.
the educational scheme or course established by mr.
after receiving the charge with every mark of derision, thepupils formed in line and buzzingly passed a ragged book from hand tohand.
as soon as thisvolume began to circulate, mr.
the pupils thenentered among themselves upon a competitive examination on the subjectof boots, with the view of ascertaining who could tread the hardest uponwhose toes.
this part of the course wasusually lightened by several single combats between biddy and refractorystudents.
when this horrible din had lasted a certain time,it mechanically awoke mr.
this was understood to terminatethe course for the evening, and we emerged into the air with shrieks ofintellectual victory.
i had received strict ordersfrom my sister to call for him at the three jolly bargemen, thatevening, on my way from school, and bring him home at my peril.
to thethree jolly bargemen, therefore, i directed my steps.
there was a bar at the jolly bargemen, with some alarmingly long chalkscores in it on the wall at the side of the door, which seemed to me tobe never paid off.
they had been there ever since i could remember, andhad grown more than i had.
but there was a quantity of chalk about ourcountry, and perhaps the people neglected no opportunity of turning itto account.
wopsle and astranger.
his head wasall on one side, and one of his eyes was half shut up, as if he weretaking aim at something with an invisible gun.
he had a pipe in hismouth, and he took it out, and, after slowly blowing all his smoke awayand looking hard at me all the time, nodded.
so, i nodded, and then henodded again, and made room on the settle beside him that i might sitdown there.
our clerk atchurch.
the stranger, with a comfortable kind of grunt over his pipe, puthis legs up on the settle that he had to himself.
wopsle, and pip.
which appeared to meto be an inquiry of unnecessary strength.
havinghis hand in, mr.
wopsle referred to me, he consideredit a necessary part of such reference to rumple my hair and poke it intomy eyes.
i cannot conceive why everybody of his standing who visitedat our house should always have put me through the same inflammatoryprocess under similar circumstances.
all this while, the strange man looked at nobody but me, and looked atme as if he were determined to have a shot at me at last, and bring medown.
he stirred his rum and water pointedly at me,and he tasted his rum and water pointedly at me.
but he now reclined on hissettle, taking very little notice of me, and talking principally aboutturnips.
on the way home, if i had been in a humor for talking, the talk musthave been all on my side, for mr.
wopsle parted from us at the door ofthe jolly bargemen, and joe went all the way home with his mouth wideopen, to rinse the rum out with as much air as possible.
but i was ina manner stupefied by this turning up of my old misdeed and oldacquaintance, and could think of nothing else.
my sister was not in a very bad temper when we presented ourselves inthe kitchen, and joe was encouraged by that unusual circumstance to tellher about the bright shilling.
joe, throwing down the shilling and catching up thepaper.
joe caught up his hat again, and ran with them to the jollybargemen to restore them to their owner.
while he was gone, i sat downon my usual stool and looked vacantly at my sister, feeling pretty surethat the man would not be there.
presently, joe came back, saying that the man was gone, but that he,joe, had left word at the three jolly bargemen concerning the notes.
there they remained, a nightmare to me, many and manya night and day.
i was haunted by the file too.
a dread possessed me that when i leastexpected it, the file would reappear.
she locked it after admittingme, as she had done before, and again preceded me into the dark passagewhere her candle stood.
the passage was a long one, and seemed to pervade the whole squarebasement of the manor house.
we traversed but one side of the square,however, and at the end of it she stopped, and put her candle down andopened a door.
there was a clock in theouter wall of this house.
i divined that my coming had stopped conversation in the room, and thatits other occupants were looking at me.
there were three ladies in the room and one gentleman.
indeed, wheni knew her better i began to think it was a mercy she had any featuresat all, so very blank and high was the dead wall of her face.
i cried about it frombreakfast till dinner.
i injured my digestion.
and i shall often think of that with peace,when i wake up in the night.
she stood looking at me, and, of course, i stood looking at her.
he was a burly man of an exceedingly dark complexion, with anexceedingly large head, and a corresponding large hand.
he took my chinin his large hand and turned up my face to have a look at me by thelight of the candle.
his eyes were set very deep in his head, and were disagreeably sharp andsuspicious.
he was nothingto me, and i could have had no foresight then, that he ever would beanything to me, but it happened that i had this opportunity of observinghim well.
from that room, too, the daylight was completely excluded, and it had anairless smell that was oppressive.
it wasspacious, and i dare say had once been handsome, but every discerniblething in it was covered with dust and mould, and dropping to pieces.
themost prominent object was a long table with a tablecloth spread on it,as if a feast had been in preparation when the house and the clocks allstopped together.
i heard the mice too, rattling behind the panels, as if the sameoccurrence were important to their interests.
these crawling things had fascinated my attention, and i was watchingthem from a distance, when miss havisham laid a hand upon my shoulder.
they shall come and look at me here.
when her lightappeared, i returned to miss havisham, and we started away again roundand round the room.
we swept on, and i felt that i was highlyobnoxious to camilla.
raymond is a witness what nervous jerkings i have in my legs.
chokingsand nervous jerkings, however, are nothing new to me when i think withanxiety of those i love.
if i could be less affectionate and sensitive,i should have a better digestion and an iron set of nerves.
i am surei wish it could be so.
the raymond referred to, i understood to be the gentleman present, andhim i understood to be mr.
when this same matthew was mentioned, miss havisham stopped me andherself, and stood looking at the speaker.
i shall think of it with a melancholysatisfaction when i wake up in the night.
i wish matthew could havethat comfort, but he sets it at defiance.
camilla interposing, as mrs.
camilla laid her hand upon her heavingbosom, that lady assumed an unnatural fortitude of manner which isupposed to be expressive of an intention to drop and choke when out ofview, and kissing her hand to miss havisham, was escorted forth.
while estella was away lighting them down, miss havisham still walkedwith her hand on my shoulder, but more and more slowly.
they come here on the day, but theydare not refer to it.
it and i have worn awaytogether.
the mice have gnawed at it, and sharper teeth than teeth ofmice have gnawed at me.
i remained quiet.
estella returned, and she too remainedquiet.
it seemed to me that we continued thus for a long time.
inthe heavy air of the room, and the heavy darkness that brooded in itsremoter corners, i even had an alarming fancy that estella and i mightpresently begin to decay.
estella, for her part, likewise treated me as before, except that shedid not condescend to speak.
there, too, i was again left towander about as i liked.
it is not much to the purpose whether a gate in that garden wall whichi had scrambled up to peep over on the last occasion was, on that lastoccasion, open or shut.
enough that i saw no gate then, and that isaw one now.
never questioning fora moment that the house was now empty, i looked in at another window,and found myself, to my great surprise, exchanging a broad stare with apale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair.
this pale young gentleman quickly disappeared, and reappeared beside me.
he had been at his books when i had found myself staring at him, and inow saw that he was inky.
here, he skipped from his left leg on tohis right.
therefore, ifollowed him without a word, to a retired nook of the garden, formed bythe junction of two walls and screened by some rubbish.
on his asking meif i was satisfied with the ground, and on my replying yes, he begged myleave to absent himself for a moment, and quickly returned with a bottleof water and a sponge dipped in vinegar.
i judged him to be about my own age, but he was much taller, and hehad a way of spinning himself about that was full of appearance.
my heart failed me when i saw him squaring at me with everydemonstration of mechanical nicety, and eyeing my anatomy as if he wereminutely choosing his bone.
but, he was on his feet directly, and after sponging himself witha great show of dexterity began squaring again.
the second greatestsurprise i have ever had in my life was seeing him on his back again,looking up at me out of a black eye.
his spirit inspired me with great respect.
indeed, i goso far as to hope that i regarded myself while dressing as a species ofsavage young wolf or other wild beast.
instead of going straight to the gate, too,she stepped back into the passage, and beckoned me.
i think i would have gonethrough a great deal to kiss her cheek.
but i felt that the kiss wasgiven to the coarse common boy as a piece of money might have been, andthat it was worth nothing.
chapter xiimy mind grew very uneasy on the subject of the pale young gentleman.
themore i thought of the fight, and recalled the pale young gentleman onhis back in various stages of puffy and incrimsoned countenance, themore certain it appeared that something would be done to me.
without having any definite idea of the penalties i hadincurred, it was clear to me that village boys could not go stalkingabout the country, ravaging the houses of gentlefolks and pitching intothe studious youth of england, without laying themselves open to severepunishment.
for some days, i even kept close at home, and looked out atthe kitchen door with the greatest caution and trepidation before goingon an errand, lest the officers of the county jail should pounce uponme.
when the day came round for my return to the scene of the deed ofviolence, my terrors reached their height.
it was not alluded to in any way, and no paleyoung gentleman was to be discovered on the premises.
over and over and over again,we would make these journeys, and sometimes they would last as long asthree hours at a stretch.
i insensibly fall into a general mention ofthese journeys as numerous, because it was at once settled that i shouldreturn every alternate day at noon for these purposes, and because i amnow going to sum up a period of at least eight or ten months.
estella was always about, and always let me in and out, but never toldme i might kiss her again.
this was not a very ceremonious way of renderinghomage to a patron saint, but i believe old clem stood in that relationtowards smiths.
ithappened so to catch her fancy that she took it up in a low broodingvoice as if she were singing in her sleep.
besides, that shrinking from having miss havisham and estella discussed,which had come upon me in the beginning, grew much more potent as timewent on.
why it came natural to me to do so, and why biddyhad a deep concern in everything i told her, i did not know then, thoughi think i know now.
meanwhile, councils went on in the kitchen at home, fraught withalmost insupportable aggravation to my exasperated spirit.
hold upyour head, boy, and be forever grateful unto them which so did do.
in these discussions, joe bore no part.
but he was often talked at,while they were in progress, by reason of mrs.
there was a most irritating end toevery one of these debates.
let him come soon, and comealong with you.
we walked to town, my sister leading the way in a very large beaverbonnet, and carrying a basket like the great seal of england in plaitedstraw, a pair of pattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella, though itwas a fine bright day.
estella took no notice of either of us, but led us the way that i knewso well.
i followed next to her, and joe came last.
when i looked backat joe in the long passage, he was still weighing his hat with thegreatest care, and was coming after us in long strides on the tips ofhis toes.
the more i made faces and gesturesto him to do it, the more confidential, argumentative, and polite, hepersisted in being to me.
i took the indentures out of his hand and gave them tomiss havisham.
give it to your master, pip.
gargery is your master now.
of course, as an honest man, you will expect noother and no more.
in another minute we were outside thegate, and it was locked, and estella was gone.
my reason is to be found inwhat took place in mr.
and drew a long breath.
joe was going to break out, but joe went on.
not too much,but pretty well.
this boy must be bound, out of hand.
bound out of hand.
pumblechook holding me all the whileas if we had looked in on our way to the scaffold, to have those littlepreliminaries disposed of.
for,it inscrutably appeared to stand to reason, in the minds of the wholecompany, that i was an excrescence on the entertainment.
that, rather late in the evening mr.
i had liked it once, but once was not now.
chapter xivit is a most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home.
but, joe had sanctified it, and i had believed in it.
within a single year all this was changed.
now it was allcoarse and common, and i would not have had miss havisham and estellasee it on any account.
well orill done, excusably or inexcusably, it was done.
never has that curtain dropped so heavy and blank, as when my way inlife lay stretched out straight before me through the newly entered roadof apprenticeship to joe.
it is about the only thing i am glad to knowof myself in that connection.
it was not because i was faithful, but becausejoe was faithful, that i never ran away and went for a soldier ora sailor.
it was not because i had a strong sense of the virtue ofindustry, but because joe had a strong sense of the virtue of industry,that i worked with tolerable zeal against the grain.
i was haunted by the fear that shewould, sooner or later, find me out, with a black face and hands, doingthe coarsest part of my work, and would exult over me and despise me.
after that, when we went into supper, the place and the meal would havea more homely look than ever, and i would feel more ashamed of home thanever, in my own ungracious breast.
chapter xvas i was getting too big for mr.
although the only coherent part of the latter piece of literature werethe opening lines.
in my hunger for information, i made proposals to mr.
wopsle tobestow some intellectual crumbs upon me, with which he kindly complied.
wopsle in hispoetic fury had severely mauled me.
whatever i acquired, i tried to impart to joe.
this statement sounds sowell, that i cannot in my conscience let it pass unexplained.
i never knew joe toremember anything from one sunday to another, or to acquire, under mytuition, any piece of information whatever.
dear fellow, i hope he did.
it was pleasant and quiet, out there with the sails on the river passingbeyond the earthwork, and sometimes, when the tide was low, lookingas if they belonged to sunken ships that were still sailing on at thebottom of the water.
but in regard to wisiting miss havisham.
when miss havisham done thehandsome thing by you, she called me back to say to me as that wereall.
i tell you, i heard her.
no, i would not.
i never thought of making miss havisham any present.
it was a slip of mine.
but, he was particular in stipulating that if i were not receivedwith cordiality, or if i were not encouraged to repeat my visit as avisit which had no ulterior object but was simply one of gratitude for afavor received, then this experimental trip should have no successor.
bythese conditions i promised to abide.
now, joe kept a journeyman at weekly wages whose name was orlick.
this morose journeyman had no liking for me.
no favoring in this shop.
you are a rich man, upon my life, to waste wages inthat way.
being by this time a perfect fury and a completesuccess, she made a dash at the door which i had fortunately locked.
what could the wretched joe do now, after his disregarded parentheticalinterruptions, but stand up to his journeyman, and ask him what he meantby interfering betwixt himself and mrs.
but, if any man in that neighborhoodcould stand uplong against joe, i never saw the man.
a pot of beer had appearedfrom the jolly bargemen, and they were sharing it by turns in apeaceable manner.
nor, how i passed and repassedthe gate many times before i could make up my mind to ring.
miss sarah pocket came to the gate.
i only wanted you to know that i am doingvery well in my apprenticeship, and am always much obliged to you.
she spared me the trouble of considering, by dismissing me.
as i was loitering along the high street, looking in disconsolately atthe shop windows, and thinking what i would buy if i were a gentleman,who should come out of the bookshop but mr.
wopsle had inhis hand the affecting tragedy of george barnwell, in which he had thatmoment invested sixpence, with the view of heaping every word of it onthe head of pumblechook, with whom he was going to drink tea.
wopslegot into newgate, i thought he never would go to the scaffold, he becameso much slower than at any former period of his disgraceful career.
ithought it a little too much that he should complain of being cut shortin his flower after all, as if he had not been running to seed, leafafter leaf, ever since his course began.
this, however, was amere question of length and wearisomeness.
what stung me, was theidentification of the whole affair with my unoffending self.
wopsle, too, tookpains to present me in the worst light.
it was a very dark night when it was all over, and when i set out withmr.
wopsle on the walk home.
beyond town, we found a heavy mist out, andit fell wet and thick.
we were noticing this, and saying how that the mist rose with achange of wind from a certain quarter of our marshes, when we came upona man, slouching under the lee of the turnpike house.
orlick, in an intellectual evening.
i come in behind yourself.
by the by, the guns isgoing again.
the guns have beengoing since dark, about.
orlick, with hishands in his pockets, slouched heavily at my side.
it was very dark,very wet, very muddy, and so we splashed along.
now and then, the soundof the signal cannon broke upon us again, and again rolled sulkily alongthe course of the river.
i kept myself to myself and my thoughts.
wopsle died amiably at camberwell, and exceedingly game on bosworthfield, and in the greatest agonies at glastonbury.
thus, we came to the village.
so did orlick, at my side.
the house seems to have been violentlyentered when joe gargery was out.
supposed by convicts.
somebody hasbeen attacked and hurt.
chapter xviwith my head full of george barnwell, i was at first disposed to believethat i must have had some hand in the attack upon my sister, or atall events that as her near relation, popularly known to be underobligations to her, i was a more legitimate object of suspicion thanany one else.
but when, in the clearer light of next morning, i began toreconsider the matter and to hear it discussed around me on all sides, itook another view of the case, which was more reasonable.
when joe went home at five minutes before ten, he found her struck downon the floor, and promptly called in assistance.
nothing had been taken away from any part of the house.
but, there was oneremarkable piece of evidence on the spot.
further, one ofthose two was already retaken, and had not freed himself of his iron.
knowing what i knew, i set up an inference of my own here.
for i believed one of two other persons to havebecome possessed of it, and to have turned it to this cruel account.
either orlick, or the strange man who had shown me the file.
it was horrible to think that i had provided the weapon, howeverundesignedly, but i could hardly think otherwise.
i suffered unspeakabletrouble while i considered and reconsidered whether i should at lastdissolve that spell of my childhood and tell joe all the story.
formonths afterwards, i every day settled the question finally in thenegative, and reopened and reargued it next morning.
they took up several obviouslywrong people, and they ran their heads very hard against wrong ideas,and persisted in trying to fit the circumstances to the ideas, insteadof trying to extract ideas from the circumstances.
but not quite, for they never did it.
long after these constitutional powers had dispersed, my sister lay veryill in bed.
when, at last, she came round so far as tobe helped downstairs, it was still necessary to keep my slate always byher, that she might indicate in writing what she could not indicate inspeech.
the administration of mutton instead of medicine, the substitution oftea for joe, and the baker for bacon, were among the mildest of my ownmistakes.
however, her temper was greatly improved, and she was patient.
atremulous uncertainty of the action of all her limbs soon became apart of her regular state, and afterwards, at intervals of two or threemonths, she would often put her hands to her head, and would then remainfor about a week at a time in some gloomy aberration of mind.
we wereat a loss to find a suitable attendant for her, until a circumstancehappened conveniently to relieve us.
i had tried hard at it, but had madenothing of it.
i had in vain tried everything producible that began with a t,from tar to toast and tub.
thereupon, i had brought in all our hammers, one afteranother, but without avail.
then i bethought me of a crutch, the shapebeing much the same, and i borrowed one in the village, and displayedit to my sister with considerable confidence.
but she shook her head tothat extent when she was shown it, that we were terrified lest in herweak and shattered state she should dislocate her neck.
when my sister found that biddy was very quick to understand her, thismysterious sign reappeared on the slate.
we told him why we wanted him to come into thekitchen, and he slowly laid down his hammer, wiped his brow with hisarm, took another wipe at it with his apron, and came slouchingout, with a curious loose vagabond bend in the knees that stronglydistinguished him.
i confess that i expected to see my sister denounce him, and that iwas disappointed by the different result.
she manifested the greatestanxiety to be on good terms with him, was evidently much pleased by hisbeing at length produced, and motioned that she would have himgiven something to drink.
she watched his countenance as if she wereparticularly wishful to be assured that he took kindly to his reception,she showed every possible desire to conciliate him, and there was an airof humble propitiation in all she did, such as i have seen pervade thebearing of a child towards a hard master.
chapter xviii now fell into a regular routine of apprenticeship life, which wasvaried beyond the limits of the village and the marshes, by no moreremarkable circumstance than the arrival of my birthday and my payinganother visit to miss havisham.
theinterview lasted but a few minutes, and she gave me a guinea when i wasgoing, and told me to come again on my next birthday.
i may mention atonce that this became an annual custom.
daylight never entered the house as to mythoughts and remembrances of it, any more than as to the actual fact.
itbewildered me, and under its influence i continued at heart to hate mytrade and to be ashamed of home.
imperceptibly i became conscious of a change in biddy, however.
hershoes came up at the heel, her hair grew bright and neat, her hands werealways clean.
i laid down my pen, and biddy stopped in her needlework withoutlaying it down.
but you never turn to at it, biddy.
pursuing my idea as i leaned back in my wooden chair, and looked atbiddy sewing away with her head on one side, i began to think her ratheran extraordinary girl.
for i called to mind now, that she was equallyaccomplished in the terms of our trade, and the names of our differentsorts of work, and our various tools.
in short, whatever i knew, biddyknew.
theoretically, she was already as good a blacksmith as i, orbetter.
i recalledthe hopeless circumstances by which she had been surrounded in themiserable little shop and the miserable little noisy evening school,with that miserable old bundle of incompetence always to be dragged andshouldered.
i reflected that even in those untoward times there musthave been latent in biddy what was now developing, for, in my firstuneasiness and discontent i had turned to her for help, as a matter ofcourse.
biddy sat quietly sewing, shedding no more tears, and while ilooked at her and thought about it all, it occurred to me that perhapsi had not been sufficiently grateful to biddy.
and i must consult you a little more, as i used to do.
let us have aquiet walk on the marshes next sunday, biddy, and a long chat.
when we had passed thevillage and the church and the churchyard, and were out on the marshesand began to see the sails of the ships as they sailed on, i began tocombine miss havisham and estella with the prospect, in my usual way.
iam disgusted with my calling and with my life.
i have never taken toeither, since i was bound.
i only want you to do well, and to becomfortable.
now, i too had so often thought it a pity, that, in the singular kind ofquarrel with myself which i was always carrying on, i was half inclinedto shed tears of vexation and distress when biddy gave utterance to hersentiment and my own.
i told her she was right, and i knew it was muchto be regretted, but still it was not to be helped.
you and i and joewould have wanted nothing then, and joe and i would perhaps have gonepartners when i was out of my time, and i might even have grown up tokeep company with you, and we might have sat on this very bank on a finesunday, quite different people.
exactly what wasperfectly manifest to me at the moment.
all thewhile knowing the madness of my heart to be so very mad and misplaced,that i was quite conscious it would have served my face right, if ihad lifted it up by my hair, and knocked it against the pebbles as apunishment for belonging to such an idiot.
biddy was the wisest of girls, and she tried to reason no more with me.
she put her hand, which was a comfortable hand though roughened by work,upon my hands, one after another, and gently took them out of my hair.
and i am glad of another thing,and that is, that of course you know you may depend upon my keeping itand always so far deserving it.
i thought it would be very good for me ifi could get her out of my head, with all the rest of those remembrancesand fancies, and could go to work determined to relish what i had to do,and stick to it, and make the best of it.
it did not appear quite so unlikely to me that evening, as it would havedone if we had discussed it a few hours before.
i therefore observedi was not quite sure of that.
but biddy said she was, and she said itdecisively.
he attached no definite meaning to the word that i am aware of, butused it, like his own pretended christian name, to affront mankind, andconvey an idea of something savagely damaging.
when i was younger, ihad had a general belief that if he had jiggered me personally, he wouldhave done it with a sharp and twisted hook.
he received that piece of information with a yell oflaughter, and dropped back, but came slouching after us at a littledistance.
curious to know whether biddy suspected him of having had a hand inthat murderous attack of which my sister had never been able to give anyaccount, i asked her why she did not like him.
he quite understood and reciprocated my good intentions, as ihad reason to know thereafter.
if my time had run out, it would have left me still at the height of myperplexities, i dare say.
it never did run out, however, but was broughtto a premature end, as i proceed to relate.
chapter xviiiit was in the fourth year of my apprenticeship to joe, and it was asaturday night.
there was a group assembled round the fire at the threejolly bargemen, attentive to mr.
wopsle as he read the newspaper aloud.
of that group i was one.
a highly popular murder had been committed, and mr.
wopsle was imbruedin blood to the eyebrows.
he gloated over every abhorrent adjectivein the description, and identified himself with every witness at theinquest.
the coroner, in mr.
he enjoyed himself thoroughly,and we all enjoyed ourselves, and were delightfully comfortable.
in thiscosey state of mind we came to the verdict wilful murder.
then, and not sooner, i became aware of a strange gentleman leaning overthe back of the settle opposite me, looking on.
there was an expressionof contempt on his face, and he bit the side of a great forefinger as hewatched the group of faces.
he lookedat everybody coldly and sarcastically.
wopsle hesitated, and we all began to conceive rather a poor opinionof him.
look at that paper you hold in your hand.
wopsle, eyeing it, much at a loss.
turn to the paper.
wopsle full ofsubterfuge.
wopsle was not the man we had thoughthim, and that he was beginning to be found out.
the strange gentleman, with an air of authority not to be disputed, andwith a manner expressive of knowing something secret about every one ofus that would effectually do for each individual if he chose to discloseit, left the back of the settle, and came into the space between the twosettles, in front of the fire, where he remained standing, his left handin his pocket, and he biting the forefinger of his right.
the strange gentleman beckoned him out of his place, and joe went.
the stranger did not recognize me, but i recognized him as the gentlemani had met on the stairs, on the occasion of my second visit to misshavisham.
perhaps wehad better go to your place of residence.
while going along, the strangegentleman occasionally looked at me, and occasionally bit the side ofhis finger.
as we neared home, joe vaguely acknowledging the occasion asan impressive and ceremonious one, went on ahead to open the front door.
our conference was held in the state parlor, which was feebly lighted byone candle.
i ampretty well known.
i have unusual business to transact with you, and icommence by explaining that it is not of my originating.
if my advicehad been asked, i should not have been here.
it was not asked, and yousee me here.
what i have to do as the confidential agent of another, ido.
no less, no more.
jaggers glanced at joe, as if he considered him a fool forhis disinterestedness.
but i was too much bewildered between breathlesscuriosity and surprise, to be sure of it.
jaggers, shutting his eyesand nodding his head at joe, as if he were forgiving him something.
and the communication i have got tomake is, that he has great expectations.
you are to understand, first, that it is the requestof the person from whom i take my instructions that you always bearthe name of pip.
you will have no objection, i dare say, to your greatexpectations being encumbered with that easy condition.
but if you haveany objection, this is the time to mention it.
pip, thatthe name of the person who is your liberal benefactor remains a profoundsecret, until the person chooses to reveal it.
i am empowered to mentionthat it is the intention of the person to reveal it at first hand byword of mouth to yourself.
it may be years hence.
now, you aredistinctly to understand that you are most positively prohibited frommaking any inquiry on this head, or any allusion or reference, howeverdistant, to any individual whomsoever as the individual, in all thecommunications you may have with me.
if you have a suspicion in your ownbreast, keep that suspicion in your own breast.
this is not foryou to inquire into.
the condition is laid down.
your acceptance of it,and your observance of it as binding, is the only remaining conditionthat i am charged with, by the person from whom i take my instructions,and for whom i am not otherwise responsible.
that person is the personfrom whom you derive your expectations, and the secret is solely held bythat person and by me.
pip, i have done with stipulations.
there is already lodged in my hands a sum of moneyamply sufficient for your suitable education and maintenance.
you willplease consider me your guardian.
it is considered that you must be better educated, in accordance withyour altered position, and that you will be alive to the importance andnecessity of at once entering on that advantage.
now, your inclinations are to be consulted.
the gentleman i speak of isone mr.
the matthewwhom mr.
camilla had spoken of.
jaggers, looking shrewdly at me, and thenshutting up his eyes while he waited for my answer.
my answer was, that i had heard of the name.
recommendation is not the word,mr.
you had better try him in his own house.
the way shall beprepared for you, and you can see his son first, who is in london.
say this day week.
this was the first time hehad taken his leg from the chair.
he sat astride of the chair when hehad pushed the money over, and sat swinging his purse and eyeing joe.
and it ever willbe similar according.
joe scooped his eyeswith his disengaged wrist, as if he were bent on gouging himself, butsaid not another word.
jaggers had looked on at this, as one who recognized in joe thevillage idiot, and in me his keeper.
no halfmeasures with me.
if you mean to take a present that i have it in chargeto make you, speak out, and you shall have it.
jaggers had risen whenjoe demonstrated, and had backed near the door.
without evincingany inclination to come in again, he there delivered his valedictoryremarks.
they were these.
let it stand for this day week, and you shallreceive my printed address in the meantime.
understand, that i express no opinion, one way or other, on the trusti undertake.
i am paid for undertaking it, and i do so.
now, understandthat, finally.
something came into my head which induced me to run after him, as he wasgoing down to the jolly bargemen, where he had left a hired carriage.
i too sat down before the fire and gazed at the coals,and nothing was said for a long time.
joe held his knees and lookedat me.
i looked at both of them.
it would all come out in goodtime, i observed, and in the meanwhile nothing was to be said, savethat i had come into great expectations from a mysterious patron.
infinite pains were then taken by biddy to convey to my sister some ideaof what had happened.
to the best of my belief, those efforts entirelyfailed.
i never could have believed it without experience, but as joe andbiddy became more at their cheerful ease again, i became quite gloomy.
any how, i sat with my elbow on my knee and my face upon my hand,looking into the fire, as those two talked about my going away, andabout what they should do without me, and all that.
though heaven knows they never didby word or sign.
the very stars to which i then raised my eyes, i am afraidi took to be but poor and humble stars for glittering on the rusticobjects among which i had passed my life.
itwould be very disagreeable to be stared at by all the people here.
and the jolly bargemen might take it as a compliment.
handsomely forgiving her, i soon exchanged anaffectionate good night with her and joe, and went up to bed.
when i gotinto my little room, i sat down and took a long look at it, as a meanlittle room that i should soon be parted from and raised above, forever.
the sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of my attic, andthe room was warm.
he never smoked so late, and it seemed to hint to me that hewanted comforting, for some reason or other.
he presently stood at the door immediately beneath me, smoking his pipe,and biddy stood there too, quietly talking to him, and i knew that theytalked of me, for i heard my name mentioned in an endearing tone by bothof them more than once.
chapter xixmorning made a considerable difference in my general prospect of life,and brightened it so much that it scarcely seemed the same.
afterbreakfast, joe brought out my indentures from the press in the bestparlor, and we put them in the fire, and i felt that i was free.
after our early dinner, i strolled out alone, purposing to finish offthe marshes at once, and get them done with.
when i awoke, i was much surprised to find joe sitting beside me,smoking his pipe.
he was so perfectlyinnocent of my meaning, however, that i thought i would mention it tobiddy in preference.
so, when we had walked home and had had tea, i took biddy into ourlittle garden by the side of the lane, and, after throwing out in ageneral way for the elevation of her spirits, that i should never forgether, said i had a favor to ask of her.
forinstance, biddy, in his learning and his manners.
i did notexpect to see this in you.
you are envious, biddy, and grudging.
say soover and over again, if you have the heart to think so.
i did intend to ask youto use any little opportunities you might have after i was gone, ofimproving dear joe.
but after this i ask you nothing.
and whatever opinion you take away of me, shall makeno difference in my remembrance of you.
but, morning once more brightened my view, and i extended my clemency tobiddy, and we dropped the subject.
putting on the best clothes i had,i went into town as early as i could hope to find the shops open,and presented myself before mr.
trabb, the tailor, who was having hisbreakfast in the parlor behind his shop, and who did not think it worthhis while to come out to me, but called me into him.
he was aprosperous old bachelor, and his open window looked into a prosperouslittle garden and orchard, and there was a prosperous iron safe let intothe wall at the side of his fireplace, and i did not doubt that heaps ofhis prosperity were put away in it in bags.
when i had entered he was sweeping the shop, and he had sweetened hislabors by sweeping over me.
he was still sweeping when i came out intothe shop with mr.
i can recommend it foryour purpose, sir, because it really is extra super.
but you shallsee some others.
trabb never removed his stern eye from the boy until he haddeposited number four on the counter and was at a safe distance again.
then he commanded him to bring number five, and number eight.
for although mr.
trabb measured andcalculated me in the parlor, as if i were an estate and he the finestspecies of surveyor, and gave himself such a world of trouble thati felt that no suit of clothes could possibly remunerate him for hispains.
when he had at last done and had appointed to send the articlesto mr.
good morning, sir, much obliged.
he was waiting for me with great impatience.
pumblechook to remember that nothing was to be ever said orhinted, on that point.
pumblechook, in the way of acompassionate adjuration.
i mentioned to mr.
pumblechook that i wished to have my new clothessent to his house, and he was ecstatic on my so distinguishing him.
imentioned my reason for desiring to avoid observation in the village,and he lauded it to the skies.
by degrees he fell to reposing such great confidence in me, as to ask myadvice in reference to his own affairs.
he mentioned that there was anopportunity for a great amalgamation and monopoly of the corn and seedtrade on those premises, if enlarged, such as had never occurredbefore in that or any other neighborhood.
what alone was wanting to therealization of a vast fortune, he considered to be more capital.
those were the two little words, more capital.
we drank all the wine, and mr.
finally, i went out into the air, witha dim perception that there was something unwonted in the conduct of thesunshine, and found that i had slumberously got to the turnpike withouthaving taken any account of the road.
there, i was roused by mr.
he was a long waydown the sunny street, and was making expressive gestures for me tostop.
i stopped, and he came up breathless.
this occasion shall not entirely pass withoutthat affability on your part.
i had scant luggage to take with me to london, for little of the littlei possessed was adapted to my new station.
but i began packing that sameafternoon, and wildly packed up things that i knew i should want nextmorning, in a fiction that there was not a moment to be lost.
myclothes were rather a disappointment, of course.
but after i had had mynew suit on some half an hour, and had gone through an immensity ofposturing with mr.
it beingmarket morning at a neighboring town some ten miles off, mr.
pumblechookwas not at home.
i had not told him exactly when i meant to leave, andwas not likely to shake hands with him again before departing.
after a very short delay, she returnedand took me up, staring at me all the way.
miss havisham was taking exercise in the room with the long spreadtable, leaning on her crutch stick.
the room was lighted as of yore, andat the sound of our entrance, she stopped and turned.
i have heard about it, pip.
sarah pocket conducted me down, as if i were a ghost who must be seenout.
she could not get over my appearance, and was in the last degreeconfounded.
as the six evenings had dwindledaway, to five, to four, to three, to two, i had become more and moreappreciative of the society of joe and biddy.
on this last evening, idressed my self out in my new clothes for their delight, and sat in mysplendor until bedtime.
we had a hot supper on the occasion, graced bythe inevitable roast fowl, and we had some flip to finish with.
we wereall very low, and none the higher for pretending to be in spirits.
fantastic failures of journeys occupiedme until the day dawned and the birds were singing.
then, i got up andpartly dressed, and sat at the window to take a last look out, and intaking it fell asleep.
biddy was astir so early to get my breakfast, that, although i did notsleep at the window an hour, i smelt the smoke of the kitchen fire wheni started up with a terrible idea that it must be late in the afternoon.
but long after that, and long after i had heard the clinking of theteacups and was quite ready, i wanted the resolution to go downstairs.
after all, i remained up there, repeatedly unlocking and unstrappingmy small portmanteau and locking and strapping it up again, until biddycalled to me that i was late.
it was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it.
then i took up my littleportmanteau and walked out.
the last i saw of them was, when i presentlyheard a scuffle behind me, and looking back, saw joe throwing an oldshoe after me and biddy throwing another old shoe.
i walked away at a good pace, thinking it was easier to go than i hadsupposed it would be, and reflecting that it would never have done tohave had an old shoe thrown after the coach, in sight of all the highstreet.
i whistled and made nothing of going.
but the village was verypeaceful and quiet, and the light mists were solemnly rising, as if toshow me the world, and i had been so innocent and little there, and allbeyond was so unknown and great, that in a moment with a strong heaveand sob i broke into tears.
if i had cried before, i should have had joewith me then.
so subdued i was by those tears, and by their breaking out again in thecourse of the quiet walk, that when i was on the coach, and it was clearof the town, i deliberated with an aching heart whether i would not getdown when we changed horses and walk back, and have another evening athome, and a better parting.
we changed, and i had not made up my mind,and still reflected for my comfort that it would be quite practicable toget down and walk back, when we changed again.
and while i was occupiedwith these deliberations, i would fancy an exact resemblance to joein some man coming along the road towards us, and my heart would beathigh.
and the mists had all solemnly risen now, andthe world lay spread before me.
chapter xxthe journey from our town to the metropolis was a journey of about fivehours.
and stopwe presently did, in a gloomy street, at certain offices with an opendoor, whereon was painted mr.
am iaddressing mr.
jaggers left word, would you wait in his room.
i began to say that i hoped i was not interrupting, when the clerkshoved this gentleman out with as little ceremony as i ever saw used,and tossing his fur cap out after him, left me alone.
i sat down in the cliental chair placed over against mr.
i wondered whatwas the history of all the odd litter about the room, and how it camethere.
i wondered whether the two swollen faces were of mr.
of course i had no experience of a london summer day, and my spirits mayhave been oppressed by the hot exhausted air, and by the dust and gritthat lay thick on everything.
but i sat wondering and waiting in mr.
when i told the clerk that i would take a turn in the air while iwaited, he advised me to go round the corner and i should come intosmithfield.
under these circumstances i thoughtmyself well rid of him for a shilling.
i dropped into the office to ask if mr.
jaggers had come in yet, and ifound he had not, and i strolled out again.
jaggers, as wellas i.
at length, as i was looking out at the iron gate of bartholomew closeinto little britain, i saw mr.
jaggers coming across the road towardsme.
all the others who were waiting saw him at the same time, and therewas quite a rush at him.
jaggers, putting a hand on my shoulderand walking me on at his side without saying anything to me, addressedhimself to his followers.
first, he took the two secret men.
jaggers, throwing hisfinger at them.
jaggers waved them behindagain, and humbly fell back and were heard no more.
then you have done all you have got to do.
no one remained now but the excitable jew, who had already raised theskirts of mr.
get out of theway.
without furtherinterruption, we reached the front office, where we found the clerk andthe man in velveteen with the fur cap.
jaggers confidentially.
jaggers suddenly became most irate.
this guileless confectioner was notby any means sober, and had a black eye in the green stage of recovery,which was painted over.
i then found that wemmick was the clerk in the next room.
another clerkwas rung down from upstairs to take his place while he was out, and iaccompanied him into the street, after shaking hands with my guardian.
chapter xxicasting my eyes on mr.
there were some marksin it that might have been dimples, if the material had been softer andthe instrument finer, but which, as it was, were only dints.
the chiselhad made three or four of these attempts at embellishment over his nose,but had given them up without an effort to smooth them off.
he had had them, to the best ofmy belief, from forty to fifty years.
we had got to the top ofholborn hill before i knew that it was merely a mechanical appearance,and that he was not smiling at all.
wemmick, looking at mewith an approving air.
my depression was notalleviated by the announcement, for, i had supposed that establishmentto be an hotel kept by mr.
wemmick explained.
wemmick at first looked at it as if hethought i wanted something.
happily it was so quick that i had notput my head out.
gradually there arosebefore me the hat, head, neckcloth, waistcoat, trousers, boots, of amember of society of about my own standing.
i acknowledged his attention incoherently, and began to think thiswas a dream.
he relinquished them with an agreeable smile, and combated withthe door as if it were a wild beast.
it yielded so suddenly at last,that he staggered back upon me, and i staggered back upon the oppositedoor, and we both laughed.
but still i felt as if my eyes must start outof my head, and as if this must be a dream.
i am sure i shall be very happy to show london to you.
pray let me takethese bags from you.
i am quite ashamed.
and then wecontemplated one another afresh, and laughed again.
but i made a modest reply, and we shook hands warmly.
i was ratheron the lookout for good fortune then.
miss havisham had sent for me, to see if she could take a fancy tome.
he was arranging his fruit in plates while we talked, which divided hisattention, and was the cause of his having made this lapse of a word.
any word of that sort.
andnow let me take the liberty of asking you a question.
i answered witha constraint i made no attempt to disguise, that i had seen mr.
of course he knew about my fatherfrom his connection with miss havisham.
i had never seen any one then, and i have never seen any one since,who more strongly expressed to me, in every look and tone, a naturalincapacity to do anything secret and mean.
there was somethingwonderfully hopeful about his general air, and something that at thesame time whispered to me he would never be very successful or rich.
i became imbued with the notion on that firstoccasion before we sat down to dinner, but i cannot define by whatmeans.
he was still a pale young gentleman, and had a certain conquered languorabout him in the midst of his spirits and briskness, that did not seemindicative of natural strength.
his figurewas a little ungainly, as in the days when my knuckles had taken suchliberties with it, but it looked as if it would always be light andyoung.
as he was so communicative, i felt that reserve on my part would be abad return unsuited to our years.
i therefore told him my small story,and laid stress on my being forbidden to inquire who my benefactor was.
i further mentioned that as i had been brought up a blacksmith in acountry place, and knew very little of the ways of politeness, i wouldtake it as a great kindness in him if he would give me a hint wheneverhe saw me at a loss or going wrong.
i dare say we shall be often together, and i should liketo banish any needless restraint between us.
i informed him in exchange that mychristian name was philip.
i tell you what i should like.
all this made thefeast delightful, and when the waiter was not there to watch me, mypleasure was without alloy.
we had made some progress in the dinner, when i reminded herbert of hispromise to tell me about miss havisham.
this hastwo advantages.
miss havisham, you mustknow, was a spoilt child.
her mother died when she was a baby, and herfather denied her nothing.
her father was a country gentleman down inyour part of the world, and was a brewer.
you see it every day.
havisham was very rich and very proud.
so was hisdaughter.
he married his second wife privately,because he was proud, and in course of time she died.
when she was dead,i apprehend he first told his daughter what he had done, and thenthe son became a part of the family, residing in the house you areacquainted with.
ithanked him, and apologized.
i only know that i found myself, with a perseverance worthy of amuch better cause, making the most strenuous exertions to compress itwithin those limits.
there is nodoubt that she perfectly idolized him.
the only independent one amongthem, he warned her that she was doing too much for this man, andwas placing herself too unreservedly in his power.
she took the firstopportunity of angrily ordering my father out of the house, in hispresence, and my father has never seen her since.
to return to the man and makean end of him.
the marriage day was fixed, the wedding dresses werebought, the wedding tour was planned out, the wedding guests wereinvited.
the day came, but not the bridegroom.
when she recovered from a bad illness that she had, shelaid the whole place waste, as you have seen it, and she has never sincelooked upon the light of day.
but i have forgotten onething.
all that i know about miss havisham, youknow.
so there can be no competition or perplexitybetween you and me.
yet he said it with so much meaning, too, that i felthe as perfectly understood miss havisham to be my benefactress, as iunderstood the fact myself.
but again there came upon me, for my relief, that oddimpression that herbert pocket would never be very successful or rich.
i shall buy up some good life assurance shares, and cut into thedirection.
i shall also do a little in the mining way.
none of thesethings will interfere with my chartering a few thousand tons on my ownaccount.
i wavered again, and began to think here were greater expectations thanmy own.
his manner of bearing his poverty, too, exactly correspondedto his manner of bearing that defeat.
it seemed to me that he took allblows and buffets now with just the same air as he had taken minethen.
yet, having already made his fortune in his own mind, he was sounassuming with it that i felt quite grateful to him for not beingpuffed up.
it was a pleasant addition to his naturally pleasant ways,and we got on famously.
on a moderate computation, it was many months, that sunday, since i hadleft joe and biddy.
the space interposed between myself and them partookof that expansion, and our marshes were any distance off.
he was to come away in an hour ortwo to attend me to hammersmith, and i was to wait about for him.
itappeared to me that the eggs from which young insurers were hatched wereincubated in dust and heat, like the eggs of ostriches, judging from theplaces to which those incipient giants repaired on a monday morning.
lifting the latch of a gate, we passed direct into a little gardenoverlooking the river, where mr.
and unless i deceive myself on a point where my interests orprepossessions are certainly not concerned, i saw that mr.
pocket received mewith an appearance of amiable dignity.
i found, now i had leisure to count them, that there were no fewer thansix little pockets present, in various stages of tumbling up.
i hadscarcely arrived at the total when a seventh was heard, as in the regionof air, wailing dolefully.
pocket read all thetime, and i was curious to know what the book could be.
we were waiting, i supposed, for mr.
i was at a loss to account forthis surprising circumstance, and could not help giving my mind tospeculations about it, until by and by millers came down with the baby,which baby was handed to flopson, which flopson was handing it to mrs.
pocket, when she too went fairly head foremost over mrs.
pocket, babyand all, and was caught by herbert and myself.
pocket acted on the advice, and inexpertly danced the infant alittle in her lap, while the other children played about it.
this hadlasted but a very short time, when mrs.
pocket issued summary ordersthat they were all to be taken into the house for a nap.
thus i made thesecond discovery on that first occasion, that the nurture of the littlepockets consisted of alternately tumbling up and lying down.
under these circumstances, when flopson and millers had got the childreninto the house, like a little flock of sheep, and mr.
pocket came outof it to make my acquaintance, i was not much surprised to find that mr.
chapter xxiiimr.
pocket said he was glad to see me, and he hoped i was not sorry tosee him.
when he had talked with me a little, he said to mrs.
i found out within a few hours, and may mention at once, that mrs.
i believe he had been knighted himself for stormingthe english grammar at the point of the pen, in a desperate addressengrossed on vellum, on the occasion of the laying of the first stone ofsome building or other, and for handing some royal personage either thetrowel or the mortar.
be that as it may, he had directed mrs.
pocket tobe brought up from her cradle as one who in the nature of thingsmust marry a title, and who was to be guarded from the acquisition ofplebeian domestic knowledge.
so successful a watch and ward had been established over the young ladyby this judicious parent, that she had grown up highly ornamental, butperfectly helpless and useless.
with her character thus happily formed,in the first bloom of her youth she had encountered mr.
as his doing theone or the other was a mere question of time, he and mrs.
the judicious parent, having nothing to bestow orwithhold but his blessing, had handsomely settled that dower upon themafter a short struggle, and had informed mr.
pocket was the object of a queer sort of forgivingreproach, because he had never got one.
he then knocked at the doors of two othersimilar rooms, and introduced me to their occupants, by name drummleand startop.
startop, younger in years and appearance,was reading and holding his head, as if he thought himself in danger ofexploding it with too strong a charge of knowledge.
they allowed a veryliberal table to mr.
this greatly distressed mrs.
by degrees i learnt, and chiefly from herbert, that mr.
pocket veryearly in life, he had impaired his prospects and taken up the callingof a grinder.
coiler, and i had the honor of taking her down todinner on the day of my installation.
she gave me to understand on thestairs, that it was a blow to dear mrs.
pocket that dear mr.
pocketshould be under the necessity of receiving gentlemen to read with him.
it came to my knowledge, through what passed between mrs.
it further appeared that the book i had seen mrs.
pocket reading in thegarden was all about titles, and that she knew the exact date at whichher grandpapa would have come into the book, if he ever had come at all.
pocketas a woman and a sister.
no one but themselves and mrs.
it was, in effect, that the cook had mislaid the beef.
to myunutterable amazement, i now, for the first time, saw mr.
pocketrelieve his mind by going through a performance that struck me as veryextraordinary, but which made no impression on anybody else, andwith which i soon became as familiar as the rest.
when he had done this,and had not lifted himself up at all, he quietly went on with what hewas about.
coiler then changed the subject and began to flatter me.
i likedit for a few moments, but she flattered me so very grossly that thepleasure was soon over.
after dinner the children were introduced, and mrs.
then, all the children laughed, and mr.
flopson, by dint of doubling the baby at the joints like a dutch doll,then got it safely into mrs.
pocket to take noticethat the handles of that instrument were not likely to agree with itseyes, and sharply charging miss jane to look after the same.
i was made very uneasy in my mind by mrs.
atlength little jane, perceiving its young brains to be imperilled, softlyleft her place, and with many small artifices coaxed the dangerousweapon away.
pocket, in an outbreak of desolate desperation.
pocket, with amajestic glance at that innocent little offender.
pocket got his hands in his hair again, and this time really didlift himself some inches out of his chair.
we all looked awkwardly at the tablecloth while this was going on.
itdoubled itself up the wrong way over mrs.
and it gainedits point after all, for i saw it through the window within a fewminutes, being nursed by little jane.
i thus became aware of themutual relations between them and mr.
pocket, which were exemplified inthe following manner.
in the evening there was rowing on the river.
as drummle and startop hadeach a boat, i resolved to set up mine, and to cut them both out.
this practical authority confused mevery much by saying i had the arm of a blacksmith.
if he could haveknown how nearly the compliment lost him his pupil, i doubt if he wouldhave paid it.
pocket, whose dignity was rousedagain.
pocket went out of the room, and we made the best ofourselves until he came back.
pocket, returning with acountenance expressive of grief and despair.
pocket uttered a dismal groan.
pocket stood, and he dropped upon it in theattitude of the dying gladiator.
chapter xxivafter two or three days, when i had established myself in my room andhad gone backwards and forwards to london several times, and had orderedall i wanted of my tradesmen, mr.
pocket and i had a long talk together.
he knew more of my intended career than i knew myself, for he referredto his having been told by mr.
i acquiesced, of course, knowing nothing to the contrary.
he advised my attending certain places in london, for the acquisition ofsuch mere rudiments as i wanted, and my investing him with the functionsof explainer and director of all my studies.
he hoped that withintelligent assistance i should meet with little to discourage me, andshould soon be able to dispense with any aid but his.
pocket didnot object to this arrangement, but urged that before any step couldpossibly be taken in it, it must be submitted to my guardian.
i feltthat this delicacy arose out of the consideration that the plan wouldsave herbert some expense, so i went off to little britain and impartedmy wish to mr.
jaggers, with a short laugh.
jaggers,knitting his brows.
jaggers, with aknowing and contradictory toss of his head.
jaggers, opening his office door.
as he happenedto go out now, and as wemmick was brisk and talkative, i said to wemmickthat i hardly knew what to make of mr.
there are only four of us.
the house was darkand shabby, and the greasy shoulders that had left their mark in mr.
this was all the establishment.
famous clients of ours that got us a world of credit.
the cast was made in newgate,directly after he was taken down.
as he had shown no diffidence on the subject, iventured on the liberty of asking him the question, when he stood beforeme, dusting his hands.
have you dined with mr.
when you goto dine with mr.
jaggers, look at his housekeeper.
i reply, that depends on the original wildnessof the beast, and the amount of taming.
keep your eye on it.
as i was taking my departure, he asked me if iwould like to devote five minutes to seeing mr.
chapter xxvbentley drummle, who was so sulky a fellow that he even took up a bookas if its writer had done him an injury, did not take up anacquaintance in a more agreeable spirit.
he came of rich people down in somersetshire,who had nursed this combination of qualities until they made thediscovery that it was just of age and a blockhead.
thus, bentley drummlehad come to mr.
pocket when he was a head taller than that gentleman,and half a dozen heads thicker than most gentlemen.
startop had been spoilt by a weak mother and kept at home when heought to have been at school, but he was devotedly attached to her, andadmired her beyond measure.
herbert was my intimate companion and friend.
we used to walk between the two places at allhours.
when i had been in mr.
camilla turned up.
these people hated me with the hatred ofcupidity and disappointment.
as a matter of course, they fawned uponme in my prosperity with the basest meanness.
these were the surroundings among which i settled down, and appliedmyself to my education.
there was no other merit in this, than my having sense enough to feelmy deficiencies.
i had not seen mr.
wemmick for some weeks, when i thought i would writehim a note and propose to go home with him on a certain evening.
thither i went, and there i found him,putting the key of his safe down his back as the clock struck.
britanniametal, every spoon.
wemmick and i beguile the time and the road,until he gave me to understand that we had arrived in the district ofwalworth.
it appeared to be a collection of back lanes, ditches, and littlegardens, and to present the aspect of a rather dull retirement.
it was protected from the weather by aningenious little tarpaulin contrivance in the nature of an umbrella.
our punch was cooling in an ornamental lake, on whose margin the bowerwas raised.
itbrushes the newgate cobwebs away, and pleases the aged.
nod away at him, mr.
never seen the aged.
never heard of him.
when i go into the office, i leave the castle behind me, andwhen i come into the castle, i leave the office behind me.
he took it, and went out, and presently thestinger went off with a bang that shook the crazy little box of acottage as if it must fall to pieces, and made every glass and teacup init ring.
the interval between that time and supper wemmick devoted to showingme his collection of curiosities.
there was a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the aged inthe day.
nor wasthere any drawback on my little turret bedroom, beyond there being sucha very thin ceiling between me and the flagstaff, that when i lay downon my back in bed, it seemed as if i had to balance that pole on myforehead all night.
wemmick was up early in the morning, and i am afraid i heard himcleaning my boots.
after that, he fell to gardening, and i saw him frommy gothic window pretending to employ the aged, and nodding at him ina most devoted manner.
he conducted us to gerrard street, soho, to a house on the south side ofthat street.
rather a stately house of its kind, but dolefully in wantof painting, and with dirty windows.
he took out his key and opened thedoor, and we all went into a stone hall, bare, gloomy, and little used.
so, up a dark brown staircase into a series of three dark brown rooms onthe first floor.
there were carved garlands on the panelled walls, andas he stood among them giving us welcome, i know what kind of loops ithought they looked like.
he told us that he held the wholehouse, but rarely used more of it than we saw.
i noticed throughout, that hekept everything under his own hand, and distributed everything himself.
it had an official look, however, andthere was nothing merely ornamental to be seen.
to my surprise, he seemed at once tobe principally if not solely interested in drummle.
i was looking at the two, when there came betweenme and them the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table.
rather tall, of a lithe nimble figure, extremelypale, with large faded eyes, and a quantity of streaming hair.
she set the dish on, touched my guardian quietly on the arm with afinger to notify that dinner was ready, and vanished.
we took our seatsat the round table, and my guardian kept drummle on one side of him,while startop sat on the other.
it was a noble dish of fish that thehousekeeper had put on table, and we had a joint of equally choicemutton afterwards, and then an equally choice bird.
similarly, he dealt us cleanplates and knives and forks, for each course, and dropped those justdisused into two baskets on the ground by his chair.
no other attendantthan the housekeeper appeared.
years afterwards, i madea dreadful likeness of that woman, by causing a face that had no othernatural resemblance to it than it derived from flowing hair to passbehind a bowl of flaming spirits in a dark room.
ifancied that i could detect in his manner a consciousness of this, and apurpose of always holding her in suspense.
dinner went off gayly, and although my guardian seemed to follow ratherthan originate subjects, i knew that he wrenched the weakest part ofour dispositions out of us.
for myself, i found that i was expressing mytendency to lavish expenditure, and to patronize herbert, and to boastof my great prospects, before i quite knew that i had opened my lips.
it was not then, but when we had got to the cheese, that ourconversation turned upon our rowing feats, and that drummle was ralliedfor coming up behind of a night in that slow amphibious way of his.
drummle upon this, informed our host that he much preferred our room toour company, and that as to skill he was more than our master, and thatas to strength he could scatter us like chaff.
so suddenly and smartly did he dothis, that we all stopped in our foolish contention.
molly, let them see your wrist.
jaggers, with an immovabledetermination to show it.
shebrought her other hand from behind her, and held the two out side byside.
when she held her hands out she took her eyes frommr.
jaggers, and turned them watchfully on every one of the rest of usin succession.
jaggers, coolly tracing out the sinewswith his forefinger.
the momenthe ceased, she looked at him again.
pray makethe best use of your time.
i am glad to see you all.
drummle, idrink to you.
in a sulky triumph, drummle showed his morosedepreciation of the rest of us, in a more and more offensive degree,until he became downright intolerable.
through all his stages, mr.
jaggers followed him with the same strange interest.
he actually seemedto serve as a zest to mr.
in our boyish want of discretion i dare say we took too much to drink,and i know we talked too much.
it led to my remarking, with more zeal than discretion, that itcame with a bad grace from him, to whom startop had lent money in mypresence but a week or so before.
and i think he added in a lower growl, that we mightboth go to the devil and shake ourselves.
wesaid that as you put it in your pocket very glad to get it, you seemedto be immensely amused at his being so weak as to lend it.
hereupon startop took him in hand, though with a much better grace thani had shown, and exhorted him to be a little more agreeable.
startop,being a lively, bright young fellow, and drummle being the exactopposite, the latter was always disposed to resent him as a directpersonal affront.
he now retorted in a coarse, lumpish way, and startoptried to turn the discussion aside with some small pleasantry that madeus all laugh.
as the door was not yet shut, i thought i would leave herbert there fora moment, and run upstairs again to say a word to my guardian.
i told him i had come up again to say how sorry i was that anythingdisagreeable should have occurred, and that i hoped he would not blameme much.
i like that spider though.
keep as clear of him as you can.
pocket was upfor good, and, to the great relief of all the house but mrs.
pocket, hewent home to the family hole.
gargery, for to let you know that heis going to london in company with mr.
wopsle and would be glad ifagreeable to be allowed to see you.
your poor sister is much the same as when you left.
we talk of youin the kitchen every night, and wonder what you are saying and doing.
ifnow considered in the light of a liberty, excuse it for the love ofpoor old days.
no more, dear mr.
he wishes me most particular to write what larks.
he says you willunderstand.
i hope and do not doubt it will be agreeable to see him,even though a gentleman, for you had ever a good heart, and he is aworthy, worthy man.
i have read him all, excepting only the last littlesentence, and he wishes me most particular to write again what larks.
if i could have kept him away by paying money, i certainlywould have paid money.
so, throughout life, our worst weaknesses and meannesses areusually committed for the sake of the people whom we most despise.
i had begun to be always decorating the chambers in some quiteunnecessary and inappropriate way or other, and very expensive thosewrestles with barnard proved to be.
by this time, the rooms werevastly different from what i had found them, and i enjoyed the honorof occupying a few prominent pages in the books of a neighboringupholsterer.
unfortunatelythe morning was drizzly, and an angel could not have concealed the factthat barnard was shedding sooty tears outside the window, like some weakgiant of a sweep.
as the time approached i should have liked to run away, but the avengerpursuant to orders was in the hall, and presently i heard joe onthe staircase.
when at last he stopped outside our door, i could hear hisfinger tracing over the painted letters of my name, and i afterwardsdistinctly heard him breathing in at the keyhole.
give me your hat.
and allfriends is no backerder, if not no forarder.
which the playacting have likeways brought himto london along with me.
partickler when he see the ghost.
as if itwere an absolute point of good breeding that it should tumble off againsoon.
i had neither the good sense nor the good feeling to know that this wasall my fault, and that if i had been easier with joe, joe would havebeen easier with me.
utterly preposterous as his cravat was, and as his collarswere, i was conscious of a sort of dignity in the look.
it was you, joe.
, or otherways havisham.
you air in correspondence with mr.
i hope one remote causeof its firing may have been my consciousness that if i had known hiserrand, i should have given him more encouragement.
diwisionsamong such must come, and must be met as they come.
the fashion of his dress could no more come in its way when hespoke these words than it could come in its way in heaven.
he touched megently on the forehead, and went out.
surely a curious thing.
my patroness, too, might hear of him, and not approve.
on thewhole, i resolved to leave the avenger behind.
it was the afternoon coach by which i had taken my place, and, as winterhad now come round, i should not arrive at my destination until two orthree hours after dark.
as i had often heard of them in the capacity of outsidepassengers, and had more than once seen them on the high road danglingtheir ironed legs over the coach roof, i had no cause to be surprisedwhen herbert, meeting me in the yard, came up and told me there were twoconvicts going down with me.
they wore the dress that ilikewise knew well.
one was a taller and stouter man than the other, and appearedas a matter of course, according to the mysterious ways of the world,both convict and free, to have had allotted to him the smaller suit ofclothes.
but this was not the worst of it.
it came out that the whole of the backof the coach had been taken by a family removing from london, and thatthere were no places for the two prisoners but on the seat in frontbehind the coachman.
i am quite ready to stay behind.
at length, it was voted that there was no help for the angry gentleman,and that he must either go in his chance company or remain behind.
so hegot into his place, still making complaints, and the keeper got into theplace next him, and the convicts hauled themselves up as well as theycould, and the convict i had recognized sat behind me with his breath onthe hair of my head.
i thought what ablessed fortune it was, that he had found another name for me than pip.
thesensation was like being touched in the marrow with some pungent andsearching acid, it set my very teeth on edge.
the weather was miserably raw, and the two cursed the cold.
i dozedoff, myself, in considering the question whether i ought to restore acouple of pounds sterling to this creature before losing sight of him,and how it could best be done.
in the act of dipping forward as if iwere going to bathe among the horses, i woke in a fright and took thequestion up again.
but i must have lost it longer than i had thought, since, althoughi could recognize nothing in the darkness and the fitful lights andshadows of our lamps, i traced marsh country in the cold damp wind thatblew at us.
cowering forward for warmth and to make me a screen againstthe wind, the convicts were closer to me than before.
giv him by friends, i expect.
he must have been a green one.
different gangs and different ships.
he was tried againfor prison breaking, and got made a lifer.
after overhearing this dialogue, i should assuredly have got down andbeen left in the solitude and darkness of the highway, but for feelingcertain that the man had no suspicion of my identity.
indeed, i was notonly so changed in the course of nature, but so differently dressed andso differently circumstanced, that it was not at all likely he couldhave known me without accidental help.
still, the coincidence of ourbeing together on the coach, was sufficiently strange to fill me with adread that some other coincidence might at any moment connect me, in hishearing, with my name.
for this reason, i resolved to alight as soon aswe touched the town, and put myself out of his hearing.
this device iexecuted successfully.
as to the convicts, they went their waywith the coach, and i knew at what point they would be spirited off tothe river.
i could not have said what i was afraid of, for my fear was altogetherundefined and vague, but there was great fear upon me.
as i walked on tothe hotel, i felt that a dread, much exceeding the mere apprehension ofa painful or disagreeable recognition, made me tremble.
i am confidentthat it took no distinctness of shape, and that it was the revival for afew minutes of the terror of childhood.
assoon as he had apologized for the remissness of his memory, he asked meif he should send boots for mr.
i entertain a conviction, based upon large experience, that if in thedays of my prosperity i had gone to the north pole, i should have metsomebody there, wandering esquimaux or civilized man, who would havetold me that pumblechook was my earliest patron and the founder of myfortunes.
chapter xxixbetimes in the morning i was up and out.
she had adopted estella, she had as good as adopted me, and it could notfail to be her intention to bring us together.
estella was the inspirationof it, and the heart of it, of course.
i mention this in this place, of afixed purpose, because it is the clew by which i am to be followed intomy poor labyrinth.
according to my experience, the conventional notionof a lover cannot be always true.
the unqualified truth is, that when iloved estella with the love of a man, i loved her simply because i foundher irresistible.
i so shaped out my walk as to arrive at the gate at my old time.
wheni had rung at the bell with an unsteady hand, i turned my back upon thegate, while i tried to get my breath and keep the beating of my heartmoderately quiet.
being at last touched on the shoulder, i started and turned.
i startedmuch more naturally then, to find myself confronted by a man in a sobergray dress.
but come in, comein.
i had my box brought alongsideme in a barrow.
i had leisure to entertain the retort in mymind, while he slowly lifted his heavy glance from the pavement, up mylegs and arms, to my face.
however, i come here some time since you left.
and then i was recommended tothe place as a man who could give another man as good as he brought, andi took it.
i give this herebell a rap with this here hammer, and you go on along the passage tillyou meet somebody.
upon that, i turned down the long passage which i had first trodden inmy thick boots, and he made his bell sound.
at the end of the passage,while the bell was still reverberating, i found sarah pocket, whoappeared to have now become constitutionally green and yellow by reasonof me.
i am glad to tell you that mr.
pocket and familyare all well.
sitting near her, with the white shoe, that had never beenworn, in her hand, and her head bent as she looked at it, was an elegantlady whom i had never seen.
but shewas so much changed, was so much more beautiful, so much more womanly,in all things winning admiration, had made such wonderful advance,that i seemed to have made none.
i fancied, as i looked at her, thati slipped hopelessly back into the coarse and common boy again.
i stammered something about the pleasure i felt inseeing her again, and about my having looked forward to it, for a long,long time.
estella smiled with perfect composure, and said shehad no doubt of my having been quite right, and of her having been verydisagreeable.
estella laughed, and looked at the shoe in her hand, and laughed again,and looked at me, and put the shoe down.
she treated me as a boy still,but she lured me on.
we sat in the dreamy room among the old strange influences which hadso wrought upon me, and i learnt that she had but just come home fromfrance, and that she was going to london.
in a word, it was impossible for meto separate her, in the past or in the present, from the innermost lifeof my life.
it would have rankled in memore than it did, if i had not regarded myself as eliciting it by beingso set apart for her and assigned to her.
the garden was too overgrown and rank for walking in with ease, andafter we had made the round of it twice or thrice, we came out againinto the brewery yard.
that i knew better.
that there could be no such beautywithout it.
but you know what i mean.
in some of her looks and gestures there was that tinge of resemblanceto miss havisham which may often be noticed to have been acquired bychildren, from grown person with whom they have been much associated andsecluded, and which, when childhood is passed, will produce a remarkableoccasional likeness of expression between faces that are otherwise quitedifferent.
and yet i could not trace this to miss havisham.
i lookedagain, and though she was still looking at me, the suggestion was gone.
ihave never had any such thing.
as my eyes followed her white hand, againthe same dim suggestion that i could not possibly grasp crossed me.
myinvoluntary start occasioned her to lay her hand upon my arm.
instantlythe ghost passed once more and was gone.
it is said, at any rate.
miss havisham willsoon be expecting you at your old post, though i think that might belaid aside now, with other old belongings.
let us make one more roundof the garden, and then go in.
she held it in one handnow, and with the other lightly touched my shoulder as we walked.
wewalked round the ruined garden twice or thrice more, and it was all inbloom for me.
if the green and yellow growth of weed in the chinks ofthe old wall had been the most precious flowers that ever blew, it couldnot have been more cherished in my remembrance.
the old wintry branches of chandeliers inthe room where the mouldering table was spread had been lighted while wewere out, and miss havisham was in her chair and waiting for me.
it was like pushing the chair itself back into the past, when we beganthe old slow circuit round about the ashes of the bridal feast.
but,in the funereal room, with that figure of the grave fallen back in thechair fixing its eyes upon her, estella looked more bright and beautifulthan before, and i was under stronger enchantment.
we had stopped near the centreof the long table, and miss havisham, with one of her withered armsstretched out of the chair, rested that clenched hand upon the yellowcloth.
as estella looked back over her shoulder before going out at thedoor, miss havisham kissed that hand to her, with a ravenous intensitythat was of its kind quite dreadful.
if she wounds you, love her.
i could feel the muscles of the thin arm roundmy neck swell with the vehemence that possessed her.
i bred her and educated her,to be loved.
i developed her into what she is, that she might be loved.
for she rose up in the chair, in her shroud of adress, and struck at the air as if she would as soon have struck herselfagainst the wall and fallen dead.
all this passed in a few seconds.
as i drew her down into her chair, iwas conscious of a scent that i knew, and turning, saw my guardian inthe room.
she made a strong attempt to compose herself, andstammered that he was as punctual as ever.
she wanders about in the night, and then layshands on such food as she takes.
put your question.
jaggers presided, estella sat opposite to him, i faced mygreen and yellow friend.
anything to equal the determined reticence of mr.
jaggers under thatroof i never saw elsewhere, even in him.
when she spoke to him, he listened, and in due course answered,but never looked at her, that i could see.
on the other hand, she oftenlooked at him, with interest and curiosity, if not distrust, but hisface never showed the least consciousness.
and when he and i were left alone together, he sat with an air upon himof general lying by in consequence of information he possessed, thatreally was too much for me.
what i suffered from, was the incompatibility between his coldpresence and my feelings towards estella.
my guardian lay at the boar in the next room to mine.
but i never thoughtthere was anything low and small in my keeping away from joe, becausei knew she would be contemptuous of him.
jaggers was occupied,if he would let the coachman know that i would get into my place whenovertaken.
i was thus enabled to fly from the blue boar immediatelyafter breakfast.
it was interesting to be in the quiet old town once more, and it was notdisagreeable to be here and there suddenly recognized and stared after.
as i passed him,his teeth loudly chattered in his head, and with every mark of extremehumiliation, he prostrated himself in the dust.
this was a hard thing to bear, but this was nothing.
he was cominground a narrow corner.
hissufferings were hailed with the greatest joy by a knot of spectators,and i felt utterly confounded.
this time, he wasentirely changed.
i wrote,however, to mr.
pip mustdecline to deal further with one who could so far forget what he owed tothe best interests of society, as to employ a boy who excited loathingin every respectable mind.
the coach, with mr.
i found herbert dining on cold meat, and delighted to welcome me back.
as confidence was out of the question with the avenger in thehall, which could merely be regarded in the light of an antechamber tothe keyhole, i sent him to the play.
a better proof of the severityof my bondage to that taskmaster could scarcely be afforded, thanthe degrading shifts to which i was constantly driven to find himemployment.
you have always adored her, ever sincei have known you.
you brought your adoration and your portmanteau heretogether.
when youtold me your own story, you told me plainly that you began adoring herthe first time you saw her, when you were very young indeed.
and she has come back, a mostbeautiful and most elegant creature.
and i saw her yesterday.
and if iadored her before, i now doubly adore her.
without encroaching on forbidden ground, wemay venture to say that there can be no doubt between ourselves ofthat fact.
you call me a lucky fellow.
of course, i am.
on the whole, i by no means recognized the analysis,but thought it not worth disputing.
you say i am lucky.
likewise, it seems to methat, concentrating our attention on the examination, we altogetheroverlook one of the best points of the animal.
jaggers would not be in it.
there was silence between us for a little while.
this maylead to miserable things.
gravely, handel,for the subject is grave enough, you know how it is as well as i do.
because itis decidedly the case with us.
my poor sister charlotte, who was next meand died before she was fourteen, was a striking example.
little janeis the same.
in her desire to be matrimonially established, youmight suppose her to have passed her short existence in the perpetualcontemplation of domestic bliss.
little alick in a frock has alreadymade arrangements for his union with a suitable young person at kew.
andindeed, i think we are all engaged, except the baby.
he had spoken so sensibly and feelingly of myweakness that i wanted to know something about his strength.
i think hewas a species of purser.
which was not at all what i meant,for i had intended my question to apply to his means.
but i have heard him constantly.
so, when i had pledged myself to comfort and abetherbert in the affair of his heart by all practicable and impracticablemeans, and when herbert had told me that his affianced already knew meby reputation and that i should be presented to her, and when we hadwarmly shaken hands upon our mutual confidence, we blew out our candles,made up our fire, locked our door, and issued forth in quest of mr.
wopsle and denmark.
my giftedtownsman stood gloomily apart, with folded arms, and i could have wishedthat his curls and forehead had been more probable.
several curious little circumstances transpired as the action proceeded.
the late king of the country not only appeared to have been troubledwith a cough at the time of his decease, but to have taken it with himto the tomb, and to have brought it back.
the royal phantom also carrieda ghostly manuscript round its truncheon, to which it had the appearanceof occasionally referring, and that too, with an air of anxiety and atendency to lose the place of reference which were suggestive of a stateof mortality.
it was likewise to be noted of this majestic spirit, thatwhereas it always appeared with an air of having been out a long timeand walked an immense distance, it perceptibly came from a closelycontiguous wall.
this occasioned its terrors to be received derisively.
upon my unfortunate townsman all these incidents accumulated withplayful effect.
whenever that undecided prince had to ask a question orstate a doubt, the public helped him out with it.
wopsle on every one of these occasions.
the joy attended mr.
we had made some pale efforts in the beginning to applaud mr.
therefore we had sat,feeling keenly for him, but laughing, nevertheless, from ear to ear.
pip and friend confessed.
but i said he had looked very nice.
pip,you will excuse my sending round.
i had the happiness to know you informer times, and the drama has ever had a claim which has ever beenacknowledged, on the noble and the affluent.
waldengarver, in a frightful perspiration, was trying toget himself out of his princely sables.
shakspeare never was complimented with a finer pair.
i had been afraid until then to say a word about the play.
waldengarver, almost, if not quite, with patronage.
waldengarver,with an air of dignity, in spite of his being ground against the wall atthe time, and holding on by the seat of the chair.
his employer would see tothat, sir.
his employer would not allow him to be drunk.
that is his employer, gentlemen.
chapter xxxiione day when i was busy with my books and mr.
it had no set beginning, as dear mr.
she sends you herregard.
my appetite vanished instantly, and i knewno peace or rest until the day arrived.
however, this is not london talk.
so might you or i be.
either of us might be accused ofit, you know.
i then rejoined mr.
wemmick, andaffecting to consult my watch, and to be surprised by the information ihad received, accepted his offer.
we were at newgate in a few minutes, and we passed through the lodgewhere some fetters were hanging up on the bare walls among the prisonrules, into the interior of the jail.
it struck me that wemmick walked among the prisoners much as a gardenermight walk among his plants.
he was highly popular, and i found that he took the familiar departmentof mr.
jaggershung about him too, forbidding approach beyond certain limits.
in one or two instances there was a difficulty respecting theraising of fees, and then mr.
was a soldier in the line and bought hisdischarge.
good afternoon,colonel.
still you see, asfar as it goes, a pair of pigeons are portable property all the same.
as we came out of the prison through the lodge, i found that the greatimportance of my guardian was appreciated by the turnkeys, no lessthan by those whom they held in charge.
jaggers does a betterthing than the way in which he keeps himself so high.
his constant height is of a piece with his immense abilities.
thatcolonel durst no more take leave of him, than that turnkey durst ask himhis intentions respecting a case.
to confess the truth, i very heartily wished, and not for thefirst time, that i had had some other guardian of minor abilities.
wemmick and i parted at the office in little britain, wheresuppliants for mr.
while mymind was thus engaged, i thought of the beautiful young estella, proudand refined, coming towards me, and i thought with absolute abhorrenceof the contrast between the jail and her.
i wished that wemmick had notmet me, or that i had not yielded to him and gone with him, so that,of all days in the year on this day, i might not have had newgate inmy breath and on my clothes.
i beat the prison dust off my feet as isauntered to and fro, and i shook it out of my dress, and i exhaledits air from my lungs.
so contaminated did i feel, remembering who wascoming, that the coach came quickly after all, and i was not yet freefrom the soiling consciousness of mr.
the distance is ten miles.
i am to have a carriage, andyou are to take me.
this is my purse, and you are to pay my charges outof it.
we are not free to follow our own devices, youand i.
she said them slightingly, but not withdispleasure.
yet the room was all in all to me, estella being in it.
i thought thatwith her i could have been happy there for life.
how do you thrive with mr.
you can scarcely realize to yourselfthe hatred those people feel for you.
this was very singularto me, and i looked at her in considerable perplexity.
for you were notbrought up in that strange house from a mere baby.
you had notyour little wits sharpened by their intriguing against you, suppressedand defenceless, under the mask of sympathy and pity and what not thatis soft and soothing.
you did not gradually open your roundchildish eyes wider and wider to the discovery of that impostor of awoman who calculates her stores of peace of mind for when she wakes upin the night.
i would not have been the cause ofthat look of hers for all my expectations in a heap.
second, i am beholden to you as the cause of their being sobusy and so mean in vain, and there is my hand upon it.
a spirit of contempt for the fawners andplotters.
but, yes, if youlike.
i rang for the tea, and the waiter, reappearing with his magic clew,brought in by degrees some fifty adjuncts to that refreshment, but oftea not a glimpse.
after a prolongedabsence at this stage of the entertainment, he at length came back witha casket of precious appearance containing twigs.
turning intocheapside and rattling up newgate street, we were soon under the wallsof which i was so ashamed.
i made a foolish pretence of not at first recognizing it, and thentold her.
but i know him no better now, than i did before i couldspeak plainly.
so we fell into other talk, and it was principally about the way bywhich we were travelling, and about what parts of london lay on thisside of it, and what on that.
yet this made me none the happier, for even if she hadnot taken that tone of our being disposed of by others, i should havefelt that she held my heart in her hand because she wilfully chose to doit, and not because it would have wrung any tenderness in her to crushit and throw it away.
when we passed through hammersmith, i showed her where mr.
matthewpocket lived, and said it was no great way from richmond, and that ihoped i should see her sometimes.
the mother is a lady ofsome station, though not averse to increasing her income.
of course shedid so purposely, and knew that i should treasure it up.
the doorway soon absorbed her boxes, and shegave me her hand and a smile, and said good night, and was absorbedlikewise.
and still i stood looking at the house, thinking how happy ishould be if i lived there with her, and knowing that i never was happywith her, but always miserable.
and more needles were missing than it could be regardedas quite wholesome for a patient of such tender years either to applyexternally or to take as a tonic.
but happening to look up at mrs.
chapter xxxivas i had grown accustomed to my expectations, i had insensibly begun tonotice their effect upon myself and those around me.
their influence onmy own character i disguised from my recognition as much as possible,but i knew very well that it was not all good.
i lived in a state ofchronic uneasiness respecting my behavior to joe.
my conscience was notby any means comfortable about biddy.
many a time of an evening, when i sat alone looking at thefire, i thought, after all there was no fire like the forge fire and thekitchen fire at home.
yet estella was so inseparable from all my restlessness and disquiet ofmind, that i really fell into confusion as to the limits of my own partin its production.
that is to say, supposing i had had no expectations,and yet had had estella to think of, i could not make out to mysatisfaction that i should have done much better.
my lavish habits led his easy nature into expenses that he could notafford, corrupted the simplicity of his life, and disturbed his peacewith anxieties and regrets.
so now, as an infallible way of making little ease great ease, i beganto contract a quantity of debt.
i could hardly begin but herbertmust begin too, so he soon followed.
but here i anticipate a little, for i was not a finch, and could not be,according to the sacred laws of the society, until i came of age.
so he got into difficulties in every direction,and continued to look about him.
i was usually at hammersmith about half the week, and when i was athammersmith i haunted richmond, whereof separately by and by.
herbertwould often come to hammersmith when i was there, and i think at thoseseasons his father would occasionally have some passing perception thatthe opening he was looking for, had not appeared yet.
but in the generaltumbling up of the family, his tumbling out in life somewhere, wasa thing to transact itself somehow.
in the meantime mr.
pocket grewgrayer, and tried oftener to lift himself out of his perplexities by thehair.
we spent as much money as we could, and got as little for it as peoplecould make up their minds to give us.
we were always more or lessmiserable, and most of our acquaintance were in the same condition.
there was a gay fiction among us that we were constantly enjoyingourselves, and a skeleton truth that we never did.
to the best of mybelief, our case was in the last aspect a rather common one.
every morning, with an air ever new, herbert went into the city to lookabout him.
if we all did whatwe undertake to do, as faithfully as herbert did, we might live in arepublic of the virtues.
i always thought this was business, this was the way toconfront the thing, this was the way to take the foe by the throat.
andi know herbert thought so too.
we ordered something rather special for dinner, with a bottle ofsomething similarly out of the common way, in order that our minds mightbe fortified for the occasion, and we might come well up to the mark.
dinner over, we produced a bundle of pens, a copious supply of ink, anda goodly show of writing and blotting paper.
for there was somethingvery comfortable in having plenty of stationery.
the sound of our pens going refreshed us exceedingly,insomuch that i sometimes found it difficult to distinguish between thisedifying business proceeding and actually paying the money.
in point ofmeritorious character, the two things seemed about equal.
look into your affairs.
starethem out of countenance.
when i had got all my responsibilitiesdown upon my list, i compared each with the bill, and ticked it off.
when i had no more ticks to make, i folded all my bills up uniformly,docketed each on the back, and tied the whole into a symmetricalbundle.
i hadthe highest opinion of the wisdom of this same margin, but i am boundto acknowledge that on looking back, i deem it to have been an expensivedevice.
for, we always ran into new debt immediately, to the full extentof the margin, and sometimes, in the sense of freedom and solvency itimparted, got pretty far on into another margin.
but there was a calm, a rest, a virtuous hush, consequent on theseexaminations of our affairs that gave me, for the time, an admirableopinion of myself.
we shut our outer door on these solemn occasions, in order that we mightnot be interrupted.
i had fallen into my serene state one evening, whenwe heard a letter dropped through the slit in the said door, and fall onthe ground.
, and its contents were simply, thati was an honored sir, and that they begged to inform me that mrs.
chapter xxxvit was the first time that a grave had opened in my road of life, andthe gap it made in the smooth ground was wonderful.
the figure of mysister in her chair by the kitchen fire, haunted me night and day.
in my rooms too, with which she had never been at all associated, therewas at once the blankness of death and a perpetual suggestion of thesound of her voice or the turn of her face or figure, as if she werestill alive and had been often there.
whatever my fortunes might have been, i could scarcely have recalled mysister with much tenderness.
but i suppose there is a shock of regretwhich may exist without much tenderness.
having written to joe, to offer him consolation, and to assure himthat i would come to the funeral, i passed the intermediate days inthe curious state of mind i have glanced at.
i went down early in themorning, and alighted at the blue boar in good time to walk over to theforge.
it was fine summer weather again, and, as i walked along, the timeswhen i was a little helpless creature, and my sister did not spare me,vividly returned.
but they returned with a gentle tone upon them thatsoftened even the edge of tickler.
for now, the very breath of the beansand clover whispered to my heart that the day must come when it wouldbe well for my memory that others walking in the sunshine should besoftened as they thought of me.
at last i came within sight of the house, and saw that trabb and co.
hadput in a funereal execution and taken possession.
trabb had taken unto himself the best table, and had got all the leavesup, and was holding a kind of black bazaar, with the aid of a quantityof black pins.
but i, misled by the action, and confused by theoccasion, shook hands with him with every testimony of warm affection.
biddy, looking very neat and modest in her black dress, went quietlyhere and there, and was very helpful.
standing at thistable, i became conscious of the servile pumblechook in a black cloakand several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself,and making obsequious movements to catch my attention.
i then descried mr.
in this progress i was much annoyedby the abject pumblechook, who, being behind me, persisted all the wayas a delicate attention in arranging my streaming hatband, and smoothingmy cloak.
my thoughts were further distracted by the excessive pride ofmr.
hubble, who were surpassingly conceited and vainglorious inbeing members of so distinguished a procession.
and there, my sister waslaid quietly in the earth, while the larks sang high above it, and thelight wind strewed it with beautiful shadows of clouds and trees.
when we got back, he had the hardihood to tell me thathe wished my sister could have known i had done her so much honor, andto hint that she would have considered it reasonably purchased at theprice of her death.
after that, he drank all the rest of the sherry,and mr.
finally, he wentaway with mr.
but after dinner, when i made him take his pipe,and when i had loitered with him about the forge, and when we sat downtogether on the great block of stone outside it, we got on better.
when the shadows of evening were closingin, i took an opportunity of getting into the garden with biddy for alittle talk.
afterlooking a little at her downcast eyes as she walked beside me, i gave upthat point.
i hope we shall be able to take some care of mr.
gargery, together, until he settles down.
i am going to try to getthe place of mistress in the new school nearly finished here.
i can bewell recommended by all the neighbors, and i hope i can be industriousand patient, and teach myself while i teach others.
it was not so much a reproach as an irresistible thinking aloud.
so, i walked a little furtherwith biddy, looking silently at her downcast eyes.
gargery from the forge.
she made signs to me thatshe wanted him to sit down close to her, and wanted me to put her armsround his neck.
so i put them round his neck, and she laid her head downon his shoulder quite content and satisfied.
i told her so, and toldher that i would spend any money or take any pains to drive him out ofthat country.
i am not going to leave poor joe alone.
after anothersilent turn in the garden, i fell back on the main position.
have the goodness,biddy, to tell me why.
this shocks me very much.
as often as i was restless in the night, andthat was every quarter of an hour, i reflected what an unkindness, whatan injury, what an injustice, biddy had done me.
early in the morning i was to go.
early in the morning i was out, andlooking in, unseen, at one of the wooden windows of the forge.
therei stood, for minutes, looking at joe, already at work with a glow ofhealth and strength upon his face that made it show as if the bright sunof the life in store for him were shining on it.
herbert himself had come of age eight months before me.
i had taken care to have it well understood in little britain when mybirthday was.
on the day before it, i received an official note fromwemmick, informing me that mr.
jaggers would be glad if i would callupon him at five in the afternoon of the auspicious day.
congratulations,mr.
as i sat down, and he preserved his attitude and bent his brows at hisboots, i felt at a disadvantage, which reminded me of that old time wheni had been put upon a tombstone.
the two ghastly casts on the shelfwere not far from him, and their expression was as if they were making astupid apoplectic attempt to attend to the conversation.
i had looked into my affairs so often, that i had thoroughly destroyedany slight notion i might ever have had of their bearings.
reluctantly,i confessed myself quite unable to answer the question.
this replyseemed agreeable to mr.
wemmick appeared, handed it in,and disappeared.
now, take thispiece of paper in your hand.
now, unfold itand tell me what it is.
and a very handsome sum of money too, i think.
now, thathandsome sum of money, pip, is your own.
it is a present to you on thisday, in earnest of your expectations.
and at the rate of that handsomesum of money per annum, and at no higher rate, you are to live until thedonor of the whole appears.
as i have told you before, i am the mere agent.
i execute myinstructions, and i am paid for doing so.
i think them injudicious, buti am not paid for giving any opinion on their merits.
jaggers stopped me.
jaggers, which you desired me towaive for a moment.
jaggers, that it might be years hence when that personappeared.
and as i felt that it camequicker, and as i felt that he saw that it came quicker, i felt that ihad less chance than ever of getting anything out of him.
when that persondiscloses, my part in this business will cease and determine.
when thatperson discloses, it will not be necessary for me to know anything aboutit.
when i raised my eyesagain, i found that he had been shrewdly looking at me all the time, andwas doing so still.
as a necessary sequence, i asked him if he would favor us with hiscompany, and he promptly accepted the invitation.
so i said i would go into the outer office and talkto wemmick.
he had already locked up his safe, and made preparations for going home.
i am very desirousto serve a friend.
now i want somehow to help him to a beginning.
much as the aged is one person, and mr.
jaggers isanother.
they must not be confounded together.
jaggers and i turned ours.
i could not help wishing more than once that evening, that mr.
jaggershad had an aged in gerrard street, or a stinger, or a something, ora somebody, to unbend his brows a little.
he was a thousand times better informed and cleverer thanwemmick, and yet i would a thousand times rather have had wemmick todinner.
jaggers made not me alone intensely melancholy, because,after he was gone, herbert said of himself, with his eyes fixed on thefire, that he thought he must have committed a felony and forgotten thedetails of it, he felt so dejected and guilty.
chapter xxxviideeming sunday the best day for taking mr.
he is very regularin his walks, is my son.
very regular in everything, is my son.
jaggers, i roared that name at him.
it was worth any money to see wemmick waving a salute to me from theother side of the moat, when we might have shaken hands across it withthe greatest ease.
she might have been some two orthree years younger than wemmick, and i judged her to stand possessedof portable property.
but she seemed to be a good sort of fellow,and showed a high regard for the aged.
thinking that he did thisto give me an opportunity of taking his walworth sentiments, i seizedthe opportunity as soon as we were out of the castle.
having thought of the matter with care, i approached my subject as if ihad never hinted at it before.
i informed wemmick that i was anxious inbehalf of herbert pocket, and i told him how we had first met, and howwe had fought.
i alluded to the advantages i hadderived in my first rawness and ignorance from his society, and iconfessed that i feared i had but ill repaid them, and that he mighthave done better without me and my expectations.
keeping miss havishamin the background at a great distance, i still hinted at the possibilityof my having competed with him in his prospects, and at the certainty ofhis possessing a generous soul, and being far above any mean distrusts,retaliations, or designs.
pip, i must tell you one thing.
this isdevilish good of you.
the responsibleduty of making the toast was delegated to the aged, and that excellentold gentleman was so intent upon it that he seemed to me in some dangerof melting his eyes.
it was no nominal meal that we were going to make,but a vigorous reality.
the flag had been struck, and the gun had been fired, at the rightmoment of time, and i felt as snugly cut off from the rest of walworthas if the moat were thirty feet wide by as many deep.
we ate the whole of the toast, and drank tea in proportion, and it wasdelightful to see how warm and greasy we all got after it.
the agedespecially, might have passed for some clean old chief of a savagetribe, just oiled.
we are all attention,aged one.
but wemmick wasequally untiring and gentle in his vigilance, and the aged read on,quite unconscious of his many rescues.
whenever he looked at us, weall expressed the greatest interest and amazement, and nodded until heresumed again.
as wemmick and miss skiffins sat side by side, and as i sat in a shadowycorner, i observed a slow and gradual elongation of mr.
shortly afterwards, his mouth began towiden again.
after an interval of suspense on my part that was quiteenthralling and almost painful, i saw his hand appear on the other sideof miss skiffins.
instantly, miss skiffins stopped it with the neatnessof a placid boxer, took off that girdle or cestus as before, and laidit on the table.
at last, the aged read himself into a light slumber.
with the aid of theseappliances we all had something warm to drink, including the aged, whowas soon awake again.
miss skiffins mixed, and i observed that she andwemmick drank out of one glass.
before a week was out, i received a note from wemmick, dated walworth,stating that he hoped he had made some advance in that matterappertaining to our private and personal capacities, and that he wouldbe glad if i could come and see him again upon it.
so, i went outto walworth again, and yet again, and yet again, and i saw him byappointment in the city several times, but never held any communicationwith him on the subject in or near little britain.
wemmick pervaded it throughout, butnever appeared in it.
the whole business was so cleverly managed, that herbert had not theleast suspicion of my hand being in it.
day by day as his hopes grew stronger and his face brighter, hemust have thought me a more and more affectionate friend, for i had thegreatest difficulty in restraining my tears of triumph when i saw him sohappy.
a great event in my life, the turning point of my life, now opens on myview.
but, before i proceed to narrate it, and before i pass on to allthe changes it involved, i must give one chapter to estella.
it is notmuch to give to the theme that so long filled my heart.
chapter xxxviiiif that staid old house near the green at richmond should ever come tobe haunted when i am dead, it will be haunted, surely, by my ghost.
the lady with whom estella was placed, mrs.
brandley by name, was awidow, with one daughter several years older than estella.
they were in what is called a goodposition, and visited, and were visited by, numbers of people.
little,if any, community of feeling subsisted between them and estella, but theunderstanding was established that they were necessary to her, andthat she was necessary to them.
thenature of my relations with her, which placed me on terms of familiaritywithout placing me on terms of favor, conduced to my distraction.
she made use of me to tease other admirers, and she turned the veryfamiliarity between herself and me to the account of putting a constantslight on my devotion to her.
she had admirers without end.
there were other times when she would come to a sudden check inthis tone and in all her many tones, and would seem to pity me.
mydread always was, that this knowledge on her part laid me under a heavydisadvantage with her pride, and made me the subject of a rebelliousstruggle in her bosom.
you are to take me there, and bring me back, if you will.
shewould rather i did not travel alone, and objects to receiving my maid,for she has a sensitive horror of being talked of by such people.
we went down on the next day but one, and we found herin the room where i had first beheld her, and it is needless to add thatthere was no change in satis house.
from estella she looked at me, with a searching glance that seemed topry into my heart and probe its wounds.
i sawin this, a reason for her being beforehand assigned to me.
sending herout to attract and torment and do mischief, miss havisham sent her withthe malicious assurance that she was beyond the reach of all admirers,and that all who staked upon that cast were secured to lose.
i saw inthis that i, too, was tormented by a perversion of ingenuity, even whilethe prize was reserved for me.
the candles that lighted that room of hers were placed in sconces onthe wall.
they were high from the ground, and they burnt with the steadydulness of artificial light in air that is seldom renewed.
as i lookedround at them, and at the pale gloom they made, and at the stoppedclock, and at the withered articles of bridal dress upon the table andthe ground, and at her own awful figure with its ghostly reflectionthrown large by the fire upon the ceiling and the wall, i saw ineverything the construction that my mind had come to, repeated andthrown back to me.
it happened on the occasion of this visit that some sharp words arosebetween estella and miss havisham.
it was the first time i had ever seenthem opposed.
she had shown a proud impatience more than once before, and had ratherendured that fierce affection than accepted or returned it.
all i possess is freely yours.
allthat you have given me, is at your command to have again.
beyond that, ihave nothing.
and if you ask me to give you, what you never gave me, mygratitude and duty cannot do impossibilities.
i have never forgotten your wrongs and their causes.
i have never beenunfaithful to you or your schooling.
i have never shown any weaknessthat i can charge myself with.
the success isnot mine, the failure is not mine, but the two together make me.
it was with a depressed heart that i walked in the starlight for anhour and more, about the courtyard, and about the brewery, and aboutthe ruined garden.
i lay in that separate building across the courtyard.
it was the firsttime i had ever lain down to rest in satis house, and sleep refused tocome near me.
a thousand miss havishams haunted me.
i therefore got up and put on my clothes, and went out across the yardinto the long stone passage, designing to gain the outer courtyard andwalk there for the relief of my mind.
i followed her at a distance,and saw her go up the staircase.
she carried a bare candle in her hand,which she had probably taken from one of the sconces in her own room,and was a most unearthly object by its light.
after a time, i tried in the dark both to get out, and to go back,but i could do neither until some streaks of day strayed in and showedme where to lay my hands.
during the whole interval, whenever i went tothe bottom of the staircase, i heard her footstep, saw her light passabove, and heard her ceaseless low cry.
i thought i saw him leer in an ugly way at me while thedecanters were going round, but as there was no love lost between us,that might easily be.
whether it was possible in a christian country to get on without blood,after this, was a question on which the finches were divided.
the debateupon it grew so lively, indeed, that at least six more honorable memberstold six more, during the discussion, that they believed they knew wherethey were to be found.
drummle would bring never so slighta certificate from the lady, importing that he had the honor of heracquaintance, mr.
drummle and i then sat snortingat one another for an hour, while the grove engaged in indiscriminatecontradiction, and finally the promotion of good feeling was declared tohave gone ahead at an amazing rate.
i tell this lightly, but it was no light thing to me.
for, i cannotadequately express what pain it gave me to think that estella shouldshow any favor to a contemptible, clumsy, sulky booby, so very far belowthe average.
to the present moment, i believe it to have been referableto some pure fire of generosity and disinterestedness in my love forher, that i could not endure the thought of her stooping to that hound.
it was easy for me to find out, and i did soon find out, that drummlehad begun to follow her closely, and that she allowed him to do it.
alittle while, and he was always in pursuit of her, and he and i crossedone another every day.
the spider, as mr.
jaggers had called him, was used to lying in wait,however, and had the patience of his tribe.
so, the spider, doggedly watchingestella, outwatched many brighter insects, and would often uncoilhimself and drop at the right nick of time.
blandley totake her home, and was sitting apart among some flowers, ready to go.
i was with her, for i almost always accompanied them to and from suchplaces.
anything youlike.
it makes me wretched that you shouldencourage a man so generally despised as drummle.
you know he isdespised.
it may have its effect on others, and may bemeant to have.
in the eastern story, the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed ofstate in the flush of conquest was slowly wrought out of the quarry, thetunnel for the rope to hold it in its place was slowly carried throughthe leagues of rock, the slab was slowly raised and fitted in the roof,the rope was rove to it and slowly taken through the miles of hollow tothe great iron ring.
all being made ready with much labor, and the hourcome, the sultan was aroused in the dead of the night, and the sharpenedaxe that was to sever the rope from the great iron ring was put into hishand, and he struck with it, and the rope parted and rushed away, andthe ceiling fell.
pocket and i had for some time parted company as to our originalrelations, though we continued on the best terms.
business had taken herbert on a journey to marseilles.
i was alone, andhad a dull sense of being alone.
day after day, a vast heavy veil had beendriving over london from the east, and it drove still, as if in the eastthere were an eternity of cloud and wind.
violent blasts of rain had accompanied these ragesof wind, and the day just closed as i sat down to read had been theworst of all.
alterations have been made in that part of the temple since that time,and it has not now so lonely a character as it had then, nor is it soexposed to the river.
we lived at the top of the last house, and thewind rushing up the river shook the house that night, like dischargesof cannon, or breakings of a sea.
what nervous folly made me start, and awfully connect it with thefootstep of my dead sister, matters not.
it was past in a moment, and ilistened again, and heard the footstep stumble in coming on.
whoever was below hadstopped on seeing my lamp, for all was quiet.
and the man came on.
in the instant, i had seen a face that wasstrange to me, looking up with an incomprehensible air of being touchedand pleased by the sight of me.
moving the lamp as the man moved, i made out that he was substantiallydressed, but roughly, like a voyager by sea.
that his age was about sixty.
that he was a muscular man, strongon his legs, and that he was browned and hardened by exposure toweather.
as he ascended the last stair or two, and the light of my lampincluded us both, i saw, with a stupid kind of amazement, that he washolding out both his hands to me.
i will explain mybusiness, by your leave.
i resented it, because it seemed to imply that he expected me to respondto it.
but i took him into the room i had just left, and, having set thelamp on the table, asked him as civilly as i could to explain himself.
but, i saw nothing that in the least explained him.
on thecontrary, i saw him next moment, once more holding out both his hands tome.
he stopped in his looking at me, and slowly rubbed his right hand overhis head.
give me half a minute, please.
i knew him before he gaveme one of those aids, though, a moment before, i had not been consciousof remotely suspecting his identity.
he came back to where i stood, and again held out both his hands.
he grasped themheartily, raised them to his lips, kissed them, and still held them.
if you have come here to thank me, it was notnecessary.
i am glad to believe you haverepented and recovered yourself.
i am glad to tell you so.
i am gladthat, thinking i deserve to be thanked, you have come to thank me.
butour ways are different ways, none the less.
you are wet, and you lookweary.
when at last i put the glass to him, i saw withamazement that his eyes were full of tears.
up to this time i had remained standing, not to disguise that i wishedhim gone.
but i was softened by the softened aspect of the man, and felta touch of reproach.
i had no intention of doing it,and i am sorry for it if i did.
i gave him mine, and then he drank, and drew his sleeveacross his eyes and forehead.
i wasa poor boy then, as you know, and to a poor boy they were a littlefortune.
but, like you, i have done well since, and you must let me paythem back.
theywere clean and new, and i spread them out and handed them over tohim.
it was onlynow that i began to tremble.
some lawyer, maybe.
he caughtme, drew me to the sofa, put me up against the cushions, and bent on oneknee before me, bringing the face that i now well remembered, and that ishuddered at, very near to mine.
it was the onegrain of relief i had.
never a soul in it but myown self and mr.
in every single thing i went for, i wentfor you.
it was the money left me, andthe gains of the first few year wot i sent home to mr.
and thisway i held steady afore my mind that i would for certain come one dayand see my boy, and make myself known to him, on his own ground.
i shuddered at the thought that foranything i knew, his hand might be stained with blood.
but i held to it, and the harder it was, the stronger i held, fori was determined, and my mind firm made up.
at last i done it.
on the contrary, itwould have been better, for his preservation would then have naturallyand tenderly addressed my heart.
my first care was to close the shutters, so that no light might be seenfrom without, and then to close and make fast the doors.
italmost seemed to me as if he must stoop down presently, to file at hisleg.
i brought it out, and laid it ready for him, and myblood again ran cold when he again took me by both hands to give me goodnight.
i got away from him, without knowing how i did it, and mended the firein the room where we had been together, and sat down by it, afraid to goto bed.
in every rage of wind and rush of rain, i heard pursuers.
twice, i couldhave sworn there was a knocking and whispering at the outer door.
that, for weeks gone by, ihad passed faces in the streets which i had thought like his.
that theselikenesses had grown more numerous, as he, coming over the sea, haddrawn nearer.
that his wicked spirit had somehow sent these messengersto mine, and that now on this stormy night he was as good as his word,and with me.
this dilated until it filledthe room, and impelled me to take a candle and go in and look at mydreadful burden.
he had rolled a handkerchief round his head, and his face was set andlowering in his sleep.
but he was asleep, and quietly too, though he hada pistol lying on the pillow.
assured of this, i softly removed the keyto the outside of his door, and turned it on him before i again sat downby the fire.
gradually i slipped from the chair and lay on the floor.
when i awoke without having parted in my sleep with the perception ofmy wretchedness, the clocks of the eastward churches were striking five,the candles were wasted out, the fire was dead, and the wind and rainintensified the thick black darkness.
it could not be done, and the attempt to do it wouldinevitably engender suspicion.
not to get up a mysterywith these people, i resolved to announce in the morning that my unclehad unexpectedly come from the country.
this course i decided on while i was yet groping about in the darknessfor the means of getting a light.
not stumbling on the means after all,i was fain to go out to the adjacent lodge and get the watchman there tocome with his lantern.
now, in groping my way down the black staircase ifell over something, and that something was a man crouching in a corner.
the wind being asfierce as ever, we did not care to endanger the light in the lantern byrekindling the extinguished lamps on the staircase, but we examined thestaircase from the bottom to the top and found no one there.
all was quiet, and assuredly no otherman was in those chambers.
one lived in fountain court, and the other two lived inthe lane, and he had seen them all go home.
again, the only other manwho dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed a part had been inthe country for some weeks, and he certainly had not returned in thenight, because we had seen his door with his seal on it as we cameupstairs.
when i had got rid of him, which i thought it well to do withoutprolonging explanations, my mind was much troubled by these twocircumstances taken together.
i lighted my fire, which burnt with a raw pale flare at that time of themorning, and fell into a doze before it.
i seemed to have been dozing awhole night when the clocks struck six.
all this time i had never been able to consider my own situation, norcould i do so yet.
i had not the power to attend to it.
i was greatlydejected and distressed, but in an incoherent wholesale sort of way.
as to forming any plan for the future, i could as soon have formed anelephant.
to whom i imparted how my uncle had come inthe night and was then asleep, and how the breakfast preparations wereto be modified accordingly.
by and by, his door opened and he came out.
i could not bring myself tobear the sight of him, and i thought he had a worse look by daylight.
i have given out that you are myuncle.
i took the name of provis.
but i think there was a person, too, come in alongerme.
i was in the provinces mostly.
jaggers that way.
jaggers was for me.
he ate in a ravenous way that was very disagreeable, and all his actionswere uncouth, noisy, and greedy.
some of his teeth had failed him sincei saw him eat on the marshes, and as he turned his food in his mouth,and turned his head sideways to bring his strongest fangs to bear uponit, he looked terribly like a hungry old dog.
similarly, i must have my smoke.
havingfilled his pipe, he put the surplus tobacco back again, as if his pocketwere a drawer.
what i waschained to, and how heavily, became intelligible to me, as i heard hishoarse voice, and sat looking up at his furrowed bald head with its irongray hair at the sides.
i want to know what is to be done.
i want to know how you are tobe kept out of danger, how long you are going to stay, what projects youhave.
i forgot myselfhalf a minute ago.
lowness goes first.
look over it, dear boy.
now, go on, dear boy.
others has done it safe afore, and whatothers has done afore, others can do agen.
as to the where and how ofliving, dear boy, give me your own opinions on it.
and now let me have a look at my gentleman agen.
that the secret mustbe confided to herbert as a matter of unavoidable necessity, even if icould have put the immense relief i should derive from sharing it withhim out of the question, was plain to me.
but it was by no means soplain to mr.
the book itself had the appearance ofhaving been stolen from some court of justice, and perhaps his knowledgeof its antecedents, combined with his own experience in that wise, gavehim a reliance on its powers as a sort of legal spell or charm.
on thisfirst occasion of his producing it, i recalled how he had made me swearfidelity in the churchyard long ago, and how he had described himselflast night as always swearing to his resolutions in his solitude.
as he was at present dressed in a seafaring slop suit, in which helooked as if he had some parrots and cigars to dispose of, i nextdiscussed with him what dress he should wear.
lastly, as he had not yet been seen by thelaundress or her niece, he was to keep himself out of their view untilhis change of dress was made.
he was toremain shut up in the chambers while i was gone, and was on no accountto open the door.
i then went fromshop to shop, making such purchases as were necessary to the change inhis appearance.
this business transacted, i turned my face, on my ownaccount, to little britain.
jaggers was at his desk, but, seeing meenter, got up immediately and stood before his fire.
for, coming along i had thought well of whati was going to say.
i have no hope of its being untrue, but at least imay verify it.
jaggers, shaking his headand gathering up his skirts.
there has never been the least departure from the strict line offact.
i also communicated to him anothercaution.
he appeared to me to have obscurely hinted in his letter atsome distant idea he had of seeing you in england here.
he guided himself by it, no doubt.
a letter, under date portsmouth, from a colonistof the name of provis, asking for the particulars of your address, onbehalf of magwitch.
wemmick sent him the particulars, i understand, byreturn of post.
next day the clothes i had ordered all came home, and he put them on.
to my thinking, there was something in him that madeit hopeless to attempt to disguise him.
the more i dressed him and thebetter i dressed him, the more he looked like the slouching fugitive onthe marshes.
it had been his own idea to wear that touch of powder, and i hadconceded the powder after overcoming the shorts.
it wasabandoned as soon as tried, and he wore his grizzled hair cut short.
words cannot tell what a sense i had, at the same time, of the dreadfulmystery that he was to me.
every hour so increased my abhorrence ofhim, that i even think i might have yielded to this impulse in the firstagonies of being so haunted, notwithstanding all he had done for me andthe risk he ran, but for the knowledge that herbert must soon come back.
once, i actually did start out of bed in the night, and begin to dressmyself in my worst clothes, hurriedly intending to leave him there witheverything else i possessed, and enlist for india as a private soldier.
i doubt if a ghost could have been more terrible to me, up in thoselonely rooms in the long evenings and long nights, with the wind and therain always rushing by.
a ghost could not have been taken and hanged onmy account, and the consideration that he could be, and the dread thathe would be, were no small addition to my horrors.
the imaginary studentpursued by the misshapen creature he had impiously made, was not morewretched than i, pursued by the creature who had made me, and recoilingfrom him with a stronger repulsion, the more he admired me and thefonder he was of me.
this is written of, i am sensible, as if it had lasted a year.
it lastedabout five days.
expecting herbert all the time, i dared not go out,except when i took provis for an airing after dark.
provis,who had been asleep too, staggered up at the noise i made, and in aninstant i saw his jackknife shining in his hand.
provis, regarding him with a fixed attention, was slowlyputting up his jackknife, and groping in another pocket for somethingelse.
what would alone have set a division between that man and us, if therehad been no other dividing circumstance, was his triumph in my story.
his boast thathe had made me a gentleman, and that he had come to see me support thecharacter on his ample resources, was made for me quite as much as forhimself.
and that it was a highly agreeable boast to both of us,and that we must both be very proud of it, was a conclusion quiteestablished in his own mind.
i said to pip, i knowed as i hadbeen low.
muzzled i have beensince that half a minute when i was betrayed into lowness, muzzled i amat the present time, muzzled i ever will be.
we wereanxious for the time when he would go to his lodging and leave ustogether, but he was evidently jealous of leaving us together, and satlate.
it was midnight before i took him round to essex street, andsaw him safely in at his own dark door.
when it closed upon him, iexperienced the first moment of relief i had known since the night ofhis arrival.
difficult as it is in alarge city to avoid the suspicion of being watched, when the mind isconscious of danger in that regard, i could not persuade myself that anyof the people within sight cared about my movements.
the few who werepassing passed on their several ways, and the street was empty when iturned back into the temple.
nobody had come out at the gate with us,nobody went in at the gate with me.
as i crossed by the fountain, i sawhis lighted back windows looking bright and quiet, and, when i stood fora few moments in the doorway of the building where i lived, before goingup the stairs, garden court was as still and lifeless as the staircasewas when i ascended it.
herbert received me with open arms, and i had never felt before soblessedly what it is to have a friend.
he hadno occasion to say after that that he had conceived an aversion for mypatron, neither had i occasion to confess my own.
we interchanged thatconfidence without shaping a syllable.
still, something must bedone.
he must be stopped somehow.
and i might have gone, my dear herbert, but forthe prospect of taking counsel with your friendship and affection.
ifyou were to renounce this patronage and these favors, i suppose youwould do so with some faint hope of one day repaying what you havealready had.
i am working up towards a partnership, you know.
in the moment ofrealization, after all his toil and waiting, you cut the ground fromunder his feet, destroy his idea, and make his gains worthless to him.
nothing has been in my thoughts so distinctly as hisputting himself in the way of being taken.
that is his power over you as long as he remainsin england, and that would be his reckless course if you forsook him.
i said to herbert, meanwhile, thateven if provis were recognized and taken, in spite of himself, i shouldbe wretched as the cause, however innocently.
you will have to go with him, and then he may be inducedto go.
then you must get him out of england before you stir afinger to extricate yourself.
there is but one way that i know of.
i must ask him pointblank.
with this project formed, we went to bed.
waking, i never lost that fear.
he came round at the appointed time, took out his jackknife, and satdown to his meal.
it is strangeto know no more about either, and particularly you, than i was able totell last night.
in jail and out of jail, injail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail.
i first become awareof myself down in essex, a thieving turnips for my living.
they always went on agen me about the devil.
he was a smooth one to talk, and wasa dab at the ways of gentlefolks.
he was in a decline, and was ashadow to look at.
but arthur soon settled theaccount.
i was alwaysin debt to him, always under his thumb, always a working, always agetting into danger.
and i was so miserablepoor, that i sold all the clothes i had, except what hung on my back,afore i could get jaggers.
whenthe prosecution opened and the evidence was put short, aforehand, inoticed how heavy it all bore on me, and how light on him.
at last i come behind himand hit him on the cheek to turn him round and get a smashing one athim, when i was seen and seized.
upon my soul, i half believe he escaped in his terror, to get quitof me, not knowing it was me as had got ashore.
i hunted him down.
ismashed his face.
i was put in irons, broughtto trial again, and sent for life.
if compeyson were alive and should discover his return, i couldhardly doubt the consequence.
but, i said to herbert that, before i couldgo abroad, i must see both estella and miss havisham.
this was when wewere left alone on the night of the day when provis told us his story.
iresolved to go out to richmond next day, and i went.
on my presenting myself at mrs.
i couldmake nothing of this, except that it was meant that i should makenothing of it, and i went home again in complete discomfiture.
we both knew that i had but to propose anything, and hewould consent.
we agreed that his remaining many days in his presenthazard was not to be thought of.
provis was to be strictly careful while i was gone, andherbert was to take the charge of him that i had taken.
i was to beabsent only one night, and, on my return, the gratification of hisimpatience for my starting as a gentleman on a greater scale was tobe begun.
it was poisonous to me to see him in the town, for i verywell knew why he had come there.
pretending to read a smeary newspaper long out of date, which hadnothing half so legible in its local news, as the foreign matter ofcoffee, pickles, fish sauces, gravy, melted butter, and wine with whichit was sprinkled all over, as if it had taken the measles in a highlyirregular form, i sat at my table while he stood before the fire.
bydegrees it became an enormous injury to me that he stood before thefire.
and i got up, determined to have my share of it.
i had to put myhand behind his legs for the poker when i went up to the fireplace tostir the fire, but still pretended not to know him.
drummle, my shoulders squared and my back to the fire.
drummle, edging me a little awaywith his shoulder.
drummle looked at his boots and i looked at mine, and then mr.
drummle looked at my boots, and i looked at his.
i felt here, through a tingling in my blood, that if mr.
drummle would have jerked me into the nearest box.
hewhistled a little.
i am going out for a ride in thesaddle.
i mean to explore those marshes for amusement.
look here, you sir.
one thing was manifest to both of us, and that was, that until reliefcame, neither of us could relinquish the fire.
there we stood, wellsquared up before it, shoulder to shoulder and foot to foot, with ourhands behind us, not budging an inch.
the waiter reappeared.
i thoughthe was gone, when he came back, calling for a light for the cigar in hismouth, which he had forgotten.
too heavily out of sorts to care much at the time whether it were he orno, or after all to touch the breakfast, i washed the weather and thejourney from my face and hands, and went out to the memorable old housethat it would have been so much the better for me never to have entered,never to have seen.
estella was knitting, and miss havisham was looking on.
they both raisedtheir eyes as i went in, and both saw an alteration in me.
i derivedthat, from the look they interchanged.
estella, pausing a moment in her knitting with her eyes upon me, andthen going on, i fancied that i read in the action of her fingers, asplainly as if she had told me in the dumb alphabet, that she perceived ihad discovered my real benefactor.
with all that ruin at my feet and about me, it seemed a naturalplace for me, that day.
it will not surprise you, it will notdisplease you.
i am as unhappy as you can ever have meant me to be.
it is not a fortunate discovery,and is not likely ever to enrich me in reputation, station, fortune,anything.
there are reasons why i must say no more of that.
his being my lawyer, andhis being the lawyer of your patron is a coincidence.
he holds the samerelation towards numbers of people, and it might easily arise.
be thatas it may, it did arise, and was not brought about by any one.
itold her so, as she sat brooding after this outburst.
i never made them.
i know themto have been as honestly under my delusion as i myself.
and i should befalse and base if i did not tell you, whether it is acceptable to you orno, and whether you are inclined to give credence to it or no, that youdeeply wrong both mr.
matthew pocket and his son herbert, if you supposethem to be otherwise than generous, upright, open, and incapable ofanything designing or mean.
theymay be of the same blood, but, believe me, they are not of the samenature.
miss havisham, if you would spare the moneyto do my friend herbert a lasting service in life, but which from thenature of the case must be done without his knowledge, i could show youhow.
why i fail in myability to finish it, i cannot explain.
allthis time estella knitted on.
you know that i have loved youlong and dearly.
isaw that miss havisham glanced from me to her, and from her to me.
it induced meto hope that miss havisham meant us for one another.
while i thought youcould not help yourself, as it were, i refrained from saying it.
but imust say it now.
i have no hopethat i shall ever call you mine, estella.
i am ignorant what may becomeof me very soon, how poor i may be, or where i may go.
still, i loveyou.
i have loved you ever since i first saw you in this house.
but i think she did not.
i think that, in theendurance of her own trial, she forgot mine, estella.
you address nothing in my breast, you touchnothing there.
but you would not be warned, for you thought i did not mean it.
i make a greatdifference between you and all other people when i say so much.
i can dono more.
miss havishamgives you to him, as the greatest slight and injury that could be doneto the many far better men who admire you, and to the few who trulylove you.
among those few there may be one who loves you even as dearly,though he has not loved you as long, as i.
the preparations for my marriage are making, and i shall bemarried soon.
i shall do well enough, and so will my husband.
we shall never understand each other.
this will pass in no time.
youhave been in every line i have ever read since i first came here, therough common boy whose poor heart you wounded even then.
you have beenthe embodiment of every graceful fancy that my mind has ever becomeacquainted with.
the stones of which the strongest london buildingsare made are not more real, or more impossible to be displaced by yourhands, than your presence and influence have been to me, there andeverywhere, and will be.
estella, to the last hour of my life, youcannot choose but remain part of my character, part of the little goodin me, part of the evil.
the rhapsody welled up within me, like blood from aninward wound, and gushed out.
i held her hand to my lips some lingeringmoments, and so i left her.
it was past midnight when i crossed london bridge.
to help his memory i mentionedmy name.
in those times a bed wasalways to be got there at any hour of the night, and the chamberlain,letting me in at his ready wicket, lighted the candle next in order onhis shelf, and showed me straight into the bedroom next in order on hislist.
when i had got into bed, and lay therefootsore, weary, and wretched, i found that i could no more close my owneyes than i could close the eyes of this foolish argus.
and thus, in thegloom and death of the night, we stared at one another.
when i had lain awake a little while, thoseextraordinary voices with which silence teems began to make themselvesaudible.
it plaited itself into whatever i thought of,as a bodily pain would have done.
not long before, i had read in thenewspapers, how a gentleman unknown had come to the hummums in thenight, and had gone to bed, and had destroyed himself, and had beenfound in the morning weltering in blood.
butall this time, why i was not to go home, and what had happened at home,and when i should go home, and whether provis was safe at home, werequestions occupying my mind so busily, that one might have supposedthere could be no more room in it for any other theme.
when at last i dozed, in sheer exhaustion of mind and body, it becamea vast shadowy verb which i had to conjugate.
it was a relief to get out of the room where the night had beenso miserable, and i needed no second knocking at the door to startle mefrom my uneasy bed.
the littleservant happening to be entering the fortress with two hot rolls, ipassed through the postern and crossed the drawbridge in her company,and so came without announcement into the presence of wemmick as he wasmaking tea for himself and the aged.
an open door afforded a perspectiveview of the aged in bed.
would you mind toasting thissausage for the aged p.
official sentimentsare one thing.
we are extra official.
i also heard that you at your chambers in garden court,temple, had been watched, and might be watched again.
i heard it, as i have in my time heard othercurious things in the same place.
but i toldhim, after a little meditation over the fire, that i would like to askhim a question, subject to his answering or not answering, as hedeemed right, and sure that his course would be right.
under existingcircumstances, there is no place like a great city when you are oncein it.
wait till things slacken,before you try the open, even for foreign air.
he mentioned to me as a secret, that he iscourting a young lady who has, as no doubt you are aware, a bedriddenpa.
the truth was, that she had objected to me as an expensive companionwho did herbert no good, and that, when herbert had first proposed topresent me to her, she had received the proposal with such very moderatewarmth, that herbert had felt himself obliged to confide the state ofthe case to me, with a view to the lapse of a little time before i madeher acquaintance.
however, i did not trouble wemmick withthese particulars.
without going near it yourself, you couldalways hear of the safety of tom, jack, or richard, through mr.
at theold lodgings it was understood that he was summoned to dover, and, infact, he was taken down the dover road and cornered out of it.
now,another great advantage of all this is, that it was done without you,and when, if any one was concerning himself about your movements, youmust be known to be ever so many miles off and quite otherwise engaged.
it brings in more confusion, and you want confusion.
you are very welcome, i am sure, mr.
do try him, if it is only for oldacquaintance sake.
afterseveral times falling short of my destination and as often overshootingit, i came unexpectedly round a corner, upon mill pond bank.
that being the name i wanted, i knocked, and an elderlywoman of a pleasant and thriving appearance responded.
she wasimmediately deposed, however, by herbert, who silently led me intothe parlor and shut the door.
he persists, too, in keeping all the provisions upstairs in hisroom, and serving them out.
he keeps them on shelves over his head, andwill weigh them all.
for, clara has no mother of her own, handel, and norelation in the world but old gruffandgrim.
whimple, by whom it had been fostered and regulatedwith equal kindness and discretion, ever since.
i was looking at her with pleasure and admiration, when suddenly thegrowl swelled into a roar again, and a frightful bumping noise was heardabove, as if a giant with a wooden leg were trying to bore it throughthe ceiling to come at us.
as we passed mr.
in his two cabin rooms at the top of the house, which were fresh andairy, and in which mr.
barley was less audible than below, i foundprovis comfortably settled.
for anything i knew, his animosity towards the manmight otherwise lead to his seeking him out and rushing on his owndestruction.
hiscoming back was a venture, he said, and he had always known it to be aventure.
he would do nothing to make it a desperate venture, and he hadvery little fear of his safety with such good help.
we agreedthat it should be carried into execution, and that provis should neverrecognize us if we came below bridge, and rowed past mill pond bank.
butwe further agreed that he should pull down the blind in that part of hiswindow which gave upon the east, whenever he saw us and all was right.
looking back at him, i thought of the first nightof his return, when our positions were reversed, and when i littlesupposed my heart could ever be as heavy and anxious at parting from himas it was now.
old barley was growling and swearing when we repassed his door, with noappearance of having ceased or of meaning to cease.
when we got to thefoot of the stairs, i asked herbert whether he had preserved the name ofprovis.
he replied, certainly not, and that the lodger was mr.
he also explained that the utmost known of mr.
campbell consigned to him, and felt a strongpersonal interest in his being well cared for, and living a secludedlife.
so, when we went into the parlor where mrs.
whimple and clara wereseated at work, i said nothing of my own interest in mr.
campbell, butkept it to myself.
and then i thought of estella, and of our parting, and wenthome very sadly.
all things were as quiet in the temple as ever i had seen them.
thewindows of the rooms on that side, lately occupied by provis, were darkand still, and there was no lounger in garden court.
i walked past thefountain twice or thrice before i descended the steps that were betweenme and my rooms, but i was quite alone.
opening one of the windows after that,he looked out into the moonlight, and told me that the pavement was assolemnly empty as the pavement of any cathedral at that same hour.
next day i set myself to get the boat.
it was soon done, and the boatwas brought round to the temple stairs, and lay where i could reachher within a minute or two.
i was often out incold, rain, and sleet, but nobody took much note of me after i had beenout a few times.
it was oldlondon bridge in those days, and at certain states of the tide therewas a race and fall of water there which gave it a bad reputation.
herbert was rarely there less frequently than threetimes in a week, and he never brought me a single word of intelligencethat was at all alarming.
still, i knew that there was cause for alarm,and i could not get rid of the notion of being watched.
in short, i was always full of fears for the rash man who was in hiding.
herbert had sometimes said to me that he found it pleasant to stand atone of our windows after dark, when the tide was running down, and tothink that it was flowing, with everything it bore, towards clara.
buti thought with dread that it was flowing towards magwitch, and thatany black mark on its surface might be his pursuers, going swiftly,silently, and surely, to take him.
chapter xlviisome weeks passed without bringing any change.
we waited for wemmick,and he made no sign.
my worldly affairs began to wear a gloomy appearance, and i was pressedfor money by more than one creditor.
buti had quite determined that it would be a heartless fraud to take moremoney from my patron in the existing state of my uncertain thoughts andplans.
as the time wore on, an impression settled heavily upon me that estellawas married.
still, no new causefor fear arose.
condemned toinaction and a state of constant restlessness and suspense, i rowedabout in my boat, and waited, waited, waited, as i best could.
from this slight occasion sprang two meetingsthat i have now to tell of.
one afternoon, late in the month of february, i came ashore at the wharfat dusk.
i had pulled down as far as greenwich with the ebb tide, andhad turned with the tide.
it had been a fine bright day, but had becomefoggy as the sun dropped, and i had had to feel my way back among theshipping, pretty carefully.
both in going and returning, i had seen thesignal in his window, all well.
the theatre where mr.
i was aware that mr.
wopsle hadnot succeeded in reviving the drama, but, on the contrary, had ratherpartaken of its decline.
and herbert had seen him as a predatorytartar of comic propensities, with a face like a red brick, and anoutrageous hat all over bells.
byand by, i roused myself, and went to the play.
the boatswain, unmanned for thefirst time, respectfully dried his eyes on the jack, and then cheeringup, and addressing mr.
wopsle as your honor, solicited permission totake him by the fin.
the second piece was the last new grand comic christmas pantomime, inthe first scene of which, it pained me to suspect that i detectedmr.
the businessof this enchanter on earth being principally to be talked at, sung at,butted at, danced at, and flashed at with fires of various colors,he had a good deal of time on his hands.
and i observed, with greatsurprise, that he devoted it to staring in my direction as if he werelost in amazement.
there was something so remarkable in the increasing glare of mr.
i was still thinkingof it when i came out of the theatre an hour afterwards, and found himwaiting for me near the door.
wopsle to explain his meaning.
i mistrusted a design to entrap me into some admission.
therefore i glanced at him as we walked on together, but said nothing.
pip, till i sawthat you were quite unconscious of him, sitting behind you there like aghost.
of course, i wasperfectly sure and safe that provis had not been there.
icould hardly believe it myself, if you told me.
pip, one of those two prisoners sat behind you tonight.
i sawhim over your shoulder.
i could not doubt, either, that he was there,because i was there, and that, however slight an appearance of dangerthere might be about us, danger was always near and active.
i put such questions to mr.
i believednot too, for, although in my brooding state i had taken no especialnotice of the people behind me, i thought it likely that a face at alldisfigured would have attracted my attention.
wopsle had imparted to me all that he could recall or iextract, and when i had treated him to a little appropriate refreshment,after the fatigues of the evening, we parted.
no onewas near me when i went in and went home.
herbert had come in, and we held a very serious council by the fire.
butthere was nothing to be done, saving to communicate to wemmick what ihad that night found out, and to remind him that we waited for his hint.
as i thought that i might compromise him if i went too often to thecastle, i made this communication by letter.
herbertand i agreed that we could do nothing else but be very cautious.
chapter xlviiithe second of the two meetings referred to in the last chapter occurredabout a week after the first.
as i stood idle by mr.
but itwas not to be done.
he turned his eyes on mr.
jaggers whenever he raisedthem from the table, and was as dry and distant to me as if there weretwin wemmicks, and this was the wrong one.
jaggers asked, soon after we began dinner.
pip into the office.
she tells me that she wants to see you on a little matter ofbusiness you mentioned to her.
at once, i think.
wemmick drank a glass of wine,and looked with a grimly satisfied air at mr.
jaggers, but not at me.
he has won the pool.
the stronger will win in the end, but the stronger has tobe found out first.
i am putting a case.
ask wemmick his opinion.
as she withdrew her hands from it, she fell back a step or two,nervously muttering some excuse.
and a certain action of her fingers, asshe spoke, arrested my attention.
she stoodlooking at her master, not understanding whether she was free to go, orwhether he had more to say to her and would call her back if she did go.
her look was very intent.
but she remainedbefore me as plainly as if she were still there.
jaggers had seen me with estella, and was not likely to have missedthe sentiments i had been at no pains to conceal.
he nodded when i saidthe subject was painful to me, clapped me on the back, put round thewine again, and went on with his dinner.
only twice more did the housekeeper reappear, and then her stay in theroom was very short, and mr.
jaggers was sharp with her.
from my point of view, he was the wrongtwin all the time, and only externally like the wemmick of walworth.
we took our leave early, and left together.
even when we were gropingamong mr.
bentley drummle.
to avoid being too abrupt, i then spokeof the aged and of miss skiffins.
he looked rather sly when i mentionedmiss skiffins, and stopped in the street to blow his nose, with a rollof the head, and a flourish not quite free from latent boastfulness.
i find i am not quite unscrewed yet.
she has been with him many a long year.
i feel a particular interest inbeing acquainted with it.
you know that what is said between you and megoes no further.
we are in our private andpersonal capacities, of course.
she was a very handsome young woman, and ibelieve had some gypsy blood in her.
anyhow, it was hot enough when itwas up, as you may suppose.
it wasa case of jealousy.
there had been aviolent struggle, perhaps a fight.
she was bruised and scratched andtorn, and had been held by the throat, at last, and choked.
now, therewas no reasonable evidence to implicate any person but this woman, andon the improbabilities of her having been able to do it mr.
jaggersprincipally rested his case.
you must accept allconsequences of that hypothesis.
for anything we know, she may havedestroyed her child, and the child in clinging to her may have scratchedher hands.
jaggers was altogether too many for thejury, and they gave in.
she has since beentaught one thing and another in the way of her duties, but she was tamedfrom the beginning.
i got your letter and destroyed it.
the best light of the day was gone when i passed along the quiet echoingcourts behind the high street.
the nooks of ruin where the old monks hadonce had their refectories and gardens, and where the strong walls werenow pressed into the service of humble sheds and stables, were almostas silent as the old monks in their graves.
an elderly woman, whom i had seen before as one of the servants wholived in the supplementary house across the back courtyard, opened thegate.
the lighted candle stood in the dark passage within, as of old,and i took it up and ascended the staircase alone.
miss havisham was notin her own room, but was in the larger room across the landing.
lookingin at the door, after knocking in vain, i saw her sitting on the hearthin a ragged chair, close before, and lost in the contemplation of, theashy fire.
therewas an air of utter loneliness upon her, that would have moved me topity though she had wilfully done me a deeper injury than i could chargeher with.
as i stood compassionating her, and thinking how, in theprogress of time, i too had come to be a part of the wrecked fortunes ofthat house, her eyes rested on me.
jaggers gave me your note yesterday, and i have lostno time.
i hadnot got far into it, when i judged from her looks that she was thinkingin a discursive way of me, rather than of what i said.
i went on with my explanation, and told herhow i had hoped to complete the transaction out of my means, but howin this i was disappointed.
i could not reply at the moment, for my voice failedme.
she put her left arm across the head of her stick, and softly laidher forehead on it.
they are the secrets i have mentioned.
i thank you for the question.
i thank you even more for thetone of the question.
but there is nothing.
there were none there, and she took from herpocket a yellow set of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnished gold, andwrote upon them with a pencil in a case of tarnished gold that hung fromher neck.
i dined with him yesterday.
jaggers knew nothing of the matter, i will send itto you.
i took the tablets from her hand, and it trembledagain, and it trembled more as she took off the chain to which thepencil was attached, and put it in mine.
all this she did withoutlooking at me.
to see her with her white hair and her worn face kneeling at my feetgave me a shock through all my frame.
ihad never seen her shed a tear before, and, in the hope that therelief might do her good, i bent over her without speaking.
she was notkneeling now, but was down upon the ground.
i should have loved her under any circumstances.
that she had done agrievous thing in taking an impressionable child to mould into the formthat her wild resentment, spurned affection, and wounded pride foundvengeance in, i knew full well.
but estella is a different case, and ifyou can ever undo any scrap of what you have done amiss in keeping apart of her right nature away from her, it will be better to do thatthan to bemoan the past through a hundred years.
at first,i meant no more.
it has inspired me with great commiseration, and ihope i understand it and its influences.
he told me that he wouldlook about him for such an orphan child.
one night he brought her hereasleep, and i called her estella.
she herself knows nothing, but that she was left anorphan and i adopted her.
but, to any mind, ithought, the connection here was clear and straight.
twilight was closing in when i went downstairs into the natural air.
icalled to the woman who had opened the gate when i entered, that i wouldnot trouble her just yet, but would walk round the place before leaving.
for i had a presentiment that i should never be there again, and i feltthat the dying light was suited to my last view of it.
by the wilderness of casks that i had walked on long ago, and on whichthe rain of years had fallen since, rotting them in many places, andleaving miniature swamps and pools of water upon those that stood onend, i made my way to the ruined garden.
a childishassociation revived with wonderful force in the moment of the slightaction, and i fancied that i saw miss havisham hanging to the beam.
the mournfulness of the place and time, and the great terror ofthis illusion, though it was but momentary, caused me to feel anindescribable awe as i came out between the open wooden gates where ihad once wrung my hair after estella had wrung my heart.
passing on intothe front courtyard, i hesitated whether to call the woman to let me outat the locked gate of which she had the key, or first to go upstairsand assure myself that miss havisham was as safe and well as i had lefther.
i took the latter course and went up.
i looked into the room where i had left her, and i saw her seated in theragged chair upon the hearth close to the fire, with her back towardsme.
in the moment when i was withdrawing my head to go quietly away,i saw a great flaming light spring up.
in the same moment i saw herrunning at me, shrieking, with a whirl of fire blazing all about her,and soaring at least as many feet above her head as she was high.
i knew nothing until i knew that we were on thefloor by the great table, and that patches of tinder yet alight werefloating in the smoky air, which, a moment ago, had been her fadedbridal dress.
then, i looked round and saw the disturbed beetles and spiders runningaway over the floor, and the servants coming in with breathless criesat the door.
she was insensible, and i was afraid to have her moved, or eventouched.
when i saw her again, anhour afterwards, she lay, indeed, where i had seen her strike her stick,and had heard her say that she would lie one day.
i found, on questioning the servants, that estella was in paris, and igot a promise from the surgeon that he would write to her by thenext post.
matthew pocket only, and leave him to do as heliked about informing the rest.
this i did next day, through herbert, assoon as i returned to town.
there was a stage, that evening, when she spoke collectedly of what hadhappened, though with a certain terrible vivacity.
as i could do no service there, and as i had, nearer home, that pressingreason for anxiety and fear which even her wanderings could not driveout of my mind, i decided, in the course of the night that i wouldreturn by the early morning coach, walking on a mile or so, and beingtaken up clear of the town.
my righthand was not so badly burnt but that i could move the fingers.
my hair hadbeen caught by the fire, but not my head or face.
when herbert had been down to hammersmith and seen his father, he cameback to me at our chambers, and devoted the day to attending on me.
hewas the kindest of nurses, and at stated times took off the bandages,and steeped them in the cooling liquid that was kept ready, and put themon again, with a patient tenderness that i was deeply grateful for.
at first, as i lay quiet on the sofa, i found it painfully difficult, imight say impossible, to get rid of the impression of the glare of theflames, their hurry and noise, and the fierce burning smell.
neither of us spoke of the boat, but we both thought of it.
but then, as herbert changed the bandages, more bythe light of the fire than by the outer light, he went back to itspontaneously.
he was perpetually pegging at the floorthe moment she left his sight.
i doubt if he can hold out long, though.
i wasspeaking of provis.
he was very communicative last night, andtold me more of his life.
you remember his breaking off here about somewoman that he had had great trouble with.
his words had given me a start.
jaggers defendedher, and the reputation of that defence first made his name knownto provis.
ihave no other information.
that evil genius, compeyson,the worst of scoundrels among many scoundrels, knowing of his keepingout of the way at that time and of his reasons for doing so, of courseafterwards held the knowledge over his head as a means of keeping himpoorer and working him harder.
it had happened some three or four years then, he said, and youbrought into his mind the little girl so tragically lost, who would havebeen about your age.
it will presently be seen that thequestion was not before me in a distinct shape until it was put beforeme by a wiser head than my own.
jaggers, and comeat the bare truth.
perhaps the latter possibilitymay be the nearer to the truth.
any way, i could scarcely be withheld from going out to gerrard streetthat night.
on the understanding, againand again reiterated, that, come what would, i was to go to mr.
early next morning we went outtogether, and at the corner of giltspur street by smithfield, i leftherbert to go his way into the city, and took my way to little britain.
there were periodical occasions when mr.
jaggers and wemmick went overthe office accounts, and checked off the vouchers, and put all thingsstraight.
on these occasions, wemmick took his books and papers into mr.
jaggers and wemmicktogether, as wemmick would then hear for himself that i said nothing tocompromise him.
my appearance, with my arm bandaged and my coat loose over my shoulders,favored my object.
although i had sent mr.
while i described the disaster, mr.
jaggers stood, according to his wont, before the fire.
wemmick leanedback in his chair, staring at me, with his hands in the pockets of histrousers, and his pen put horizontally into the post.
while that wasin course of being done, i looked on at wemmick as he wrote, and mr.
i asked her to giveme some information relative to her adopted daughter, and she gave meall she possessed.
jaggers, bending forward to look at his boots andthen straightening himself.
but she ought to know her own businessbest.
i know her mother.
and you have seen her still more recently.
but, i could not be sure of this unconsciousnesson mr.
jaggers started when i said those words.
my reply was sounexpected, that mr.
jaggers put the handkerchief back into his pocketwithout completing the usual performance, folded his arms, and lookedwith stern attention at me, though with an immovable face.
i was very careful indeed as to that.
nor did i looktowards wemmick until i had finished all i had to tell, and had been forsome time silently meeting mr.
jaggers at last, as he moved towards the papers on thetable.
irepresented myself as being surely worthy of some little confidence fromhim, in return for the confidence i had just now imparted.
i said thati did not blame him, or suspect him, or mistrust him, but i wantedassurance of the truth from him.
and if he asked me why i wanted it,and why i thought i had any right to it, i would tell him, little as hecared for such poor dreams, that i had loved estella dearly and long,and that although i had lost her, and must live a bereaved life,whatever concerned her was still nearer and dearer to me than anythingelse in the world.
and seeing that mr.
i have seen your pleasant home, and your old father, and all theinnocent, cheerful playful ways with which you refresh your businesslife.
and i entreat you to say a word for me to mr.
jaggers and wemmick did after this apostrophe.
jaggers relax into something likea smile, and wemmick become bolder.
jaggers nodded his head retrospectively two or three times, andactually drew a sigh.
but now about this other matter.
put the case that awoman, under such circumstances as you have mentioned, held her childconcealed, and was obliged to communicate the fact to her legal adviser,on his representing to her that he must know, with an eye to thelatitude of his defence, how the fact stood about that child.
put thecase that, at the same time he held a trust to find a child for aneccentric rich lady to adopt and bring up.
you came so and so, youdid such and such things to divert suspicion.
i have tracked you throughit all, and i tell it you all.
part with the child, unless it shouldbe necessary to produce it to clear you, and then it shall be produced.
give the child into my hands, and i will do my best to bring you off.
put the case that he took her in, and that he kept down theold, wild, violent nature whenever he saw an inkling of its breakingout, by asserting his power over her in the old way.
thatthe mother was still living.
that the father was still living.
that themother and father, unknown to one another, were dwelling within so manymiles, furlongs, yards if you like, of one another.
that the secret wasstill a secret, except that you had got wind of it.
put that last caseto yourself very carefully.
he gravely touched hislips with his forefinger.
jaggers did the same.
jaggers being highly dictatorial, and wemmick obstinatelyjustifying himself whenever there was the smallest point in abeyance fora moment.
but they were both happily relieved by the opportune appearance of mike,the client with the fur cap and the habit of wiping his nose on hissleeve, whom i had seen on the very first day of my appearance withinthose walls.
as he imparted this melancholycircumstance to wemmick, mr.
jaggers, advancing a step, and pointingto the door.
it was theonly good thing i had done, and the only completed thing i had done,since i was first apprised of my great expectations.
and now, indeed, i felt as if my last anchor were loosening itshold, and i should soon be driving with the winds and waves.
we had now got into the month of march.
my left arm, though it presentedno bad symptoms, took, in the natural course, so long to heal that iwas still unable to get a coat on.
on a monday morning, when herbert and i were at breakfast, i receivedthe following letter from wemmick by the post.
burn this as soon as read.
early in the week, or saywednesday, you might do what you know of, if you felt disposed to tryit.
for, ofcourse my being disabled could now be no longer kept out of view.
a goodfellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic and honorable.
anyforeign steamer that fell in our way and would take us up would do.
the time when one would be due where welay, wherever that might be, could be calculated pretty nearly, if wemade inquiries beforehand.
herbert assented to all this, and we went out immediately afterbreakfast to pursue our investigations.
we found that a steamer forhamburg was likely to suit our purpose best, and we directed ourthoughts chiefly to that vessel.
but we noted down what other foreignsteamers would leave london with the same tide, and we satisfiedourselves that we knew the build and color of each.
these precautions well understood by both of us, i went home.
if you want information regarding your uncleprovis, you had much better come and tell no one, and lose no time.
youmust come alone.
bring this with you.
what to do now, i could not tell.
and again,for anything i knew, the proffered information might have some importantbearing on the flight itself.
if i had had ample time for consideration, i believe i should still havegone.
i shouldcertainly not have gone, but for the reference to my uncle provis.
it is so difficult to become clearly possessed of the contents of almostany letter, in a violent hurry, that i had to read this mysteriousepistle again twice, before its injunction to me to be secret gotmechanically into my mind.
yielding to it in the same mechanical kind ofway, i left a note in pencil for herbert, telling him that as i shouldbe so soon going away, i knew not for how long, i had decided to hurrydown and back, to ascertain for myself how miss havisham was faring.
and now i beganto wonder at myself for being in the coach, and to doubt whether i hadsufficient reason for being there, and to consider whether i shouldget out presently and go back, and to argue against ever heeding ananonymous communication, and, in short, to pass through all those phasesof contradiction and indecision to which i suppose very few hurriedpeople are strangers.
still, the reference to provis by name masteredeverything.
avoiding the blue boar, i put up at an inn ofminor reputation down the town, and ordered some dinner.
as i was not ableto cut my dinner, the old landlord with a shining bald head did it forme.
please take it away.
my heart was deeply and most deservedly humbled as i mused over the firefor an hour or more.
the striking of the clock aroused me, but not frommy dejection or remorse, and i got up and had my coat fastened roundmy neck, and went out.
towards the marshes i now went straight, having no time to spare.
chapter liiiit was a dark night, though the full moon rose as i left the enclosedlands, and passed out upon the marshes.
beyond their dark line there wasa ribbon of clear sky, hardly broad enough to hold the red large moon.
in a few minutes she had ascended out of that clear field, in among thepiled mountains of cloud.
there was a melancholy wind, and the marshes were very dismal.
astranger would have found them insupportable, and even to me they wereso oppressive that i hesitated, half inclined to go back.
but i knewthem well, and could have found my way on a far darker night, and hadno excuse for returning, being there.
so, having come there against myinclination, i went on against it.
the direction that i took was not that in which my old home lay, northat in which we had pursued the convicts.
my back was turned towardsthe distant hulks as i walked on, and, though i could see the old lightsaway on the spits of sand, i saw them over my shoulder.
but after a little while iseemed to have the whole flats to myself.
the lime wasburning with a sluggish stifling smell, but the fires were made up andleft, and no workmen were visible.
itlay directly in my way, and had been worked that day, as i saw by thetools and barrows that were lying about.
i quickenedmy pace, and knocked at the door with my hand.
still there was no answer, and i knocked again.
no answer still, and i tried the latch.
it rose under my hand, and the door yielded.
looking in, i saw a lightedcandle on a table, a bench, and a mattress on a truckle bedstead.
it was beginning to rain fast.
seeing nothing save what i had seenalready, i turned back into the house, and stood just within the shelterof the doorway, looking out into the night.
while i was considering thatsome one must have been there lately and must soon be coming back, orthe candle would not be burning, it came into my head to look if thewick were long.
but, it was bound too tight for that.
i felt as if, having been burntbefore, it were now being boiled.
the sudden exclusion of the night, and the substitution of blackdarkness in its place, warned me that the man had closed a shutter.
after groping about for a little, he found the flint and steel hewanted, and began to strike a light.
the man was in no hurry, and struck again with the flint and steel.
presently i saw his blue lips again,breathing on the tinder, and then a flare of light flashed up, andshowed me orlick.
i had not looked for him.
seeinghim, i felt that i was in a dangerous strait indeed, and i kept my eyesupon him.
he lighted the candle from the flaring match with great deliberation,and dropped the match, and trod it out.
then he put the candle away fromhim on the table, so that he could see me, and sat with his arms foldedon the table and looked at me.
all in good time.
one keeps a secret better than two.
i could have doneyou no harm, if you had done yourself none.
you goesout of his way this present night.
the death close before me was terrible, but far more terriblethan death was the dread of being misremembered after death.
but as he sat gloating over me, i was supported bya scornful detestation of him that sealed my lips.
above all things, iresolved that i would not entreat him, and that i would die making somelast poor resistance to him.
he had been drinking, and his eyes were red and bloodshot.
around hisneck was slung a tin bottle, as i had often seen his meat and drinkslung about him in other days.
it was you as did for your shrew sister.
you wasfavored, and he was bullied and beat.
i saw by his tilting ofthe bottle that there was no great quantity left in it.
i distinctlyunderstood that he was working himself up with its contents to make anend of me.
i knew that every drop it held was a drop of my life.
my rapid mindpursued him to the town, made a picture of the street with him in it,and contrasted its lights and life with the lonely marsh and the whitevapor creeping over it, into which i should have dissolved.
it was not only that i could have summed up years and years and yearswhile he said a dozen words, but that what he did say presented picturesto me, and not mere words.
in the excited and exalted state of my brain,i could not think of a place without seeing it, or of persons withoutseeing them.
when he had drunk this second time, he rose from the bench on whichhe sat, and pushed the table aside.
then, he took up the candle, and,shading it with his murderous hand so as to throw its light on me, stoodbefore me, looking at me and enjoying the sight.
it was old orlick as you tumbledover on your stairs that night.
i had thought a prayer, and had been with joe andbiddy and herbert, before he turned towards me again.
there was a clear space of a few feet between the table and the oppositewall.
within this space, he now slouched backwards and forwards.
hisgreat strength seemed to sit stronger upon him than ever before, as hedid this with his hands hanging loose and heavy at his sides, and withhis eyes scowling at me.
i had no grain of hope left.
wild as my inwardhurry was, and wonderful the force of the pictures that rushed by meinstead of thoughts, i could yet clearly understand that, unless he hadresolved that i was within a few moments of surely perishing out of allhuman knowledge, he would never have told me what he had told.
of a sudden, he stopped, took the cork out of his bottle, and tossedit away.
light as it was, i heard it fall like a plummet.
he swallowedslowly, tilting up the bottle by little and little, and now he looked atme no more.
the last few drops of liquor he poured into the palm of hishand, and licked up.
the resolution i had made did not desert me, for, without utteringone vain word of appeal to him, i shouted out with all my might, andstruggled with all my might.
it was only my head and my legs that icould move, but to that extent i struggled with all the force, untilthen unknown, that was within me.
in the same instant i heard responsiveshouts, saw figures and a gleam of light dash in at the door, heardvoices and tumult, and saw orlick emerge from a struggle of men, as ifit were tumbling water, clear the table at a leap, and fly out into thenight.
too indifferent at first, even to look round and ascertain who supportedme, i was lying looking at the ladder, when there came between me and ita face.
it is still monday night.
i have no hurt but in this throbbingarm.
it was violently swollen andinflamed, and i could scarcely endure to have it touched.
but, they toreup their handkerchiefs to make fresh bandages, and carefully replacedit in the sling, until we could get to the town and obtain some coolinglotion to put upon it.
but,the moon was a good two hours higher than when i had last seen the sky,and the night, though rainy, was much lighter.
the white vapor of thekiln was passing from us as we went by, and as i had thought a prayerbefore, i thought a thanksgiving now.
its tone made him uneasy, and the more so because of theinconsistency between it and the hasty letter i had left for him.
when i told herbert what had passed within the house, he was for ourimmediately going before a magistrate in the town, late at night as itwas, and getting out a warrant.
but, i had already considered that sucha course, by detaining us there, or binding us to come back, mightbe fatal to provis.
there was no gainsaying this difficulty, and werelinquished all thoughts of pursuing orlick at that time.
it was daylight when we reached the temple, and i wentat once to bed, and lay in bed all day.
so anxiously looked forward to, charged with suchconsequences, its results so impenetrably hidden, though so near.
i started at every footstep and every sound, believingthat he was discovered and taken, and this was the messenger to tellme so.
my burning arm throbbed, and my burninghead throbbed, and i fancied i was beginning to wander.
i counted up tohigh numbers, to make sure of myself, and repeated passages that i knewin prose and verse.
wednesday morning was dawning when i looked out of window.
the winkinglights upon the bridges were already pale, the coming sun was like amarsh of fire on the horizon.
the river, still dark and mysterious, wasspanned by bridges that were turning coldly gray, with here and thereat top a warm touch from the burning in the sky.
from metoo, a veil seemed to be drawn, and i felt strong and well.
in goodtime they too started up strong and well, and we admitted the sharpmorning air at the windows, and looked at the tide that was stillflowing towards us.
of all my worldlypossessions i took no more than the few necessaries that filled thebag.
i only wondered for the passingmoment, as i stopped at the door and looked back, under what alteredcircumstances i should next see those rooms, if ever.
we loitered down to the temple stairs, and stood loitering there, as ifwe were not quite decided to go upon the water at all.
of course, i hadtaken care that the boat should be ready and everything in order.
our plan was this.
the tide, beginning to run down at nine, and beingwith us until three, we intended still to creep on after it had turned,and row against it until dark.
there, we meant to lie by all night.
the steamer for hamburg and the steamer for rotterdam would start fromlondon at about nine on thursday morning.
we knew the distinguishing marks of each vessel.
the relief of being at last engaged in the execution of the purposewas so great to me that i felt it difficult to realize the condition inwhich i had been a few hours before.
and now i, sitting in thestern, could see, with a faster beating heart, mill pond bank and millpond stairs.
at the stairs where we had taken him abroad, and ever since, i hadlooked warily for any token of our being suspected.
i had seen none.
wecertainly had not been, and at that time as certainly we were not eitherattended or followed by any boat.
if we had been waited on by any boat,i should have run in to shore, and have obliged her to go on, or tomake her purpose evident.
but we held our own without any appearance ofmolestation.
when it came upon him, he confrontedit, but it must come before he troubled himself.
but i reflectedthat perhaps freedom without danger was too much apart from all thehabit of his existence to be to him what it would be to another man.
the air felt cold upon the river, but it was a bright day, and thesunshine was very cheering.
the tide ran strong, i took care to losenone of it, and our steady stroke carried us on thoroughly well.
byimperceptible degrees, as the tide ran out, we lost more and more of thenearer woods and hills, and dropped lower and lower between the muddybanks, but the tide was yet with us when we were off gravesend.
and soonthe tide began to slacken, and the craft lying at anchor to swing,and presently they had all swung round, and the ships that were takingadvantage of the new tide to get up to the pool began to crowd upon usin a fleet, and we kept under the shore, as much out of the strength ofthe tide now as we could, standing carefully off from low shallows andmudbanks.
we got ashore among some slipperystones while we ate and drank what we had with us, and looked about.
we pushed off again, and made what way we could.
it was much harder worknow, but herbert and startop persevered, and rowed and rowed and roweduntil the sun went down.
by that time the river had lifted us a little,so that we could see above the bank.
so,they plied their oars once more, and i looked out for anything like ahouse.
thus we held on, speaking little, for four or five dull miles.
at this dismal time we were evidently all possessed by the idea thatwe were followed.
here andthere, the set of the current had worn down the bank into a littlecreek, and we were all suspicious of such places, and eyed themnervously.
at length we descried a light and a roof, and presently afterwards ranalongside a little causeway made of stones that had been picked up hardby.
but we considered ourselves well off,notwithstanding, for a more solitary place we could not have found.
he spoke in a slushy voice, as if much mudhad washed into his throat.
he did this with the air of a jack who was so right that he couldafford to do anything.
this dialogue made us all uneasy, and me very uneasy.
the dismal windwas muttering round the house, the tide was flapping at the shore, andi had a feeling that we were caged and threatened.
having settled to do this, we returned into the house and wentto bed.
i lay down with the greater part of my clothes on, and slept well for afew hours.
rising softly, for my charge lay fast asleep, i looked out of thewindow.
it commanded the causeway where we had hauled up our boat, and,as my eyes adapted themselves to the light of the clouded moon, i sawtwo men looking into her.
my first impulse was to call up herbert, and show him the two men goingaway.
but reflecting, before i got into his room, which was at the backof the house and adjoined mine, that he and startop had had a harder daythan i, and were fatigued, i forbore.
going back to my window, i couldsee the two men moving over the marsh.
in that light, however, i soonlost them, and, feeling very cold, lay down to think of the matter, andfell asleep again.
we were up early.
as we walked to and fro, all four together, beforebreakfast, i deemed it right to recount what i had seen.
again ourcharge was the least anxious of the party.
it was very likely that themen belonged to the custom house, he said quietly, and that they had nothought of us.
however, i proposed that he and i should walk awaytogether to a distant point we could see, and that the boat should takeus aboard there, or as near there as might prove feasible, at aboutnoon.
this being considered a good precaution, soon after breakfast heand i set forth, without saying anything at the tavern.
he smoked his pipe as we went along, and sometimes stopped to clap me onthe shoulder.
one would have supposed that it was i who was in danger,not he, and that he was reassuring me.
we spoke very little.
he complied, and i went on alone.
there was no boat offthe point, nor any boat drawn up anywhere near it, nor were there anysigns of the men having embarked there.
but, to be sure, the tide washigh, and there might have been some footpints under water.
we gotaboard easily, and rowed out into the track of the steamer.
i called to herbert and startop to keep before the tide,that she might see us lying by for her, and i adjured provis to sitquite still, wrapped in his cloak.
meantime the galley, which was veryskilfully handled, had crossed us, let us come up with her, and fallenalongside.
leaving just room enough for the play of the oars, she keptalongside, drifting when we drifted, and pulling a stroke or two when wepulled.
not a word was spoken in either boat.
she was nearing us very fast, and the beating of her peddles grew louderand louder.
i felt as if her shadow were absolutely upon us, when thegalley hailed us.
his name is abel magwitch,otherwise provis.
i apprehend that man, and call upon him to surrender,and you to assist.
they had pulled one sudden stroke ahead,had got their oars in, had run athwart us, and were holding on toour gunwale, before we knew what they were doing.
this caused greatconfusion on board the steamer, and i heard them calling to us, andheard the order given to stop the paddles, and heard them stop, but felther driving down upon us irresistibly.
still, in the same moment, i saw the prisoner startup, lean across his captor, and pull the cloak from the neck of theshrinking sitter in the galley.
still in the same moment, i saw that theface disclosed, was the face of the other convict of long ago.
still, inthe same moment, i saw the face tilt backward with a white terror on itthat i shall never forget, and heard a great cry on board the steamer,and a loud splash in the water, and felt the boat sink from under me.
presently a dark object was seen in it,bearing towards us on the tide.
no man spoke, but the steersman held uphis hand, and all softly backed water, and kept the boat straight andtrue before it.
as it came nearer, i saw it to be magwitch, swimming,but not swimming freely.
he was taken on board, and instantly manacledat the wrists and ankles.
but, the rotterdam steamer now came up, and apparently notunderstanding what had happened, came on at speed.
by the time she hadbeen hailed and stopped, both steamers were drifting away from us, andwe were rising and falling in a troubled wake of water.
at length we gave it up, and pulled under the shore towards the tavernwe had lately left, where we were received with no little surprise.
he told me that he believed himself to have gone under the keel of thesteamer, and to have been struck on the head in rising.
i never had any reason to doubt the exact truth of what he thus told me.
the officer who steered the galley gave the same account of their goingoverboard.
the jack at the ship was instructed where the drowned man had gonedown, and undertook to search for the body in the places where it waslikeliest to come ashore.
his interest in its recovery seemed to me tobe much heightened when he heard that it had stockings on.
herbert and startopwere to get to london by land, as soon as they could.
i only saw in him a much better man than i had been tojoe.
his breathing became more difficult and painful as the night drew on,and often he could not repress a groan.
that there were, still living,people enough who were able and willing to identify him, i could notdoubt.
that he would be leniently treated, i could not hope.
he who hadbeen presented in the worst light at his trial, who had since brokenprison and had been tried again, who had returned from transportationunder a life sentence, and who had occasioned the death of the man whowas the cause of his arrest.
as we returned towards the setting sun we had yesterday left behind us,and as the stream of our hopes seemed all running back, i told him howgrieved i was to think that he had come home for my sake.
i had thought about that, while we had been there side by side.
i foresaw that, being convicted, his possessions would be forfeited tothe crown.
only come to see me as if you come by chancealonger wemmick.
i had gone direct to mr.
jaggers at his privatehouse, on my arrival over night, to retain his assistance, and mr.
i imparted to mr.
jaggers my design of keeping him in ignorance of thefate of his wealth.
but he did not concealfrom me that, although there might be many cases in which the forfeiturewould not be exacted, there were no circumstances in this case to makeit one of them.
i understood that very well.
i had no claim, and i finally resolved,and ever afterwards abided by the resolution, that my heart should neverbe sickened with the hopeless task of attempting to establish one.
when his body was found, manymiles from the scene of his death, and so horribly disfigured that hewas only recognizable by the contents of his pockets, notes were stilllegible, folded in a case he carried.
both these heads ofinformation were in a list that magwitch, while in prison, gave to mr.
jaggers, of the possessions he supposed i should inherit.
he was committed to take his trial atthe next sessions, which would come on in a month.
and when i come away fromhim, you know that my thoughts are with him.
i wish you would enter on it now, as far as a few friendlywords go, with me.
firstly, mymind was too preoccupied to be able to take in the subject clearly.
whimpleconfides to me that he is certainly going.
on the stairs i encountered wemmick, who was coming down, after anunsuccessful application of his knuckles to my door.
i kept my ears open, seemingto have them shut, until i heard that he was absent, and i thought thatwould be the best time for making the attempt.
i can only suppose now,that it was a part of his policy, as a very clever man, habitually todeceive his own instruments.
what i look at is the sacrifice of so much portable property.
but what i look at is this.
the late compeysonhaving been beforehand with him in intelligence of his return, and beingso determined to bring him to book, i do not think he could have beensaved.
whereas, the portable property certainly could have been saved.
he accepted the invitation.
but if you could oblige me, i should take it as a kindness.
at hisparticular request, i appointed to call for him at the castle at halfpast eight on monday morning, and so we parted for the time.
punctual to my appointment, i rang at the castle gate on the mondaymorning, and was received by wemmick himself, who struck me as lookingtighter than usual, and having a sleeker hat on.
within, there were twoglasses of rum and milk prepared, and two biscuits.
the aged must havebeen stirring with the lark, for, glancing into the perspective of hisbedroom, i observed that his bed was empty.
theywere strengthened into certainty when i beheld the aged enter at a sidedoor, escorting a lady.
theaged was likewise occupied in preparing a similar sacrifice forthe altar of hymen.
the old gentleman, however, experienced so muchdifficulty in getting his gloves on, that wemmick found it necessaryto put him with his back against a pillar, and then to get behind thepillar himself and pull away at them, while i for my part held the oldgentleman round the waist, that he might present an equal and saferesistance.
by dint of this ingenious scheme, his gloves were got on toperfection.
the clerk and clergyman then appearing, we were ranged in order atthose fatal rails.
it was completely done, however, and when we were going out of churchwemmick took the cover off the font, and put his white gloves in it, andput the cover on again.
wemmick, more heedful of the future, puther white gloves in her pocket and assumed her green.
it was pleasant to observe that mrs.
wemmick came down to the door with me, and i again shook hands with him,and wished him joy.
you shall have some eggs, and judge foryourself.
jaggersmay as well not know of it.
he might think my brain was softening, orsomething of the kind.
he had brokentwo ribs, they had wounded one of his lungs, and he breathed with greatpain and difficulty, which increased daily.
being far too ill to remain in the common prison, he was removed, afterthe first day or so, into the infirmary.
this gave me opportunitiesof being with him that i could not otherwise have had.
the kind of submission or resignation that he showed was that of a manwho was tired out.
i sometimes derived an impression, from his manneror from a whispered word or two which escaped him, that he ponderedover the question whether he might have been a better man under bettercircumstances.
but he never justified himself by a hint tending thatway, or tried to bend the past out of its eternal shape.
it happened on two or three occasions in my presence, that his desperatereputation was alluded to by one or other of the people in attendance onhim.
a smile crossed his face then, and he turned his eyes on me witha trustful look, as if he were confident that i had seen some smallredeeming touch in him, even so long ago as when i was a little child.
as to all the rest, he was humble and contrite, and i never knew himcomplain.
when the sessions came round, mr.
jaggers caused an application to bemade for the postponement of his trial until the following sessions.
itwas obviously made with the assurance that he could not live so long,and was refused.
the trial came on at once, and, when he was put to thebar, he was seated in a chair.
no objection was made to my gettingclose to the dock, on the outside of it, and holding the hand that hestretched forth to me.
the trial was very short and very clear.
but nothing could unsay the fact thathe had returned, and was there in presence of the judge and jury.
it wasimpossible to try him for that, and do otherwise than find him guilty.
the whole scene starts out again in the vivid colors of the moment, downto the drops of april rain on the windows of the court, glittering inthe rays of april sun.
then the judgeaddressed them.
that miserable man wouldseem for a time to have become convinced of his errors, when far removedfrom the scenes of his old offences, and to have lived a peaceable andhonest life.
but in a fatal moment, yielding to those propensities andpassions, the indulgence of which had so long rendered him a scourge tosociety, he had quitted his haven of rest and repentance, and hadcome back to the country where he was proscribed.
the appointed punishment for his returnto the land that had cast him out, being death, and his case being thisaggravated case, he must prepare himself to die.
there was some hushing, and the judge went on with what he had to sayto the rest.
then they were all formally doomed, and some of them weresupported out, and some of them sauntered out with a haggard look ofbravery, and a few nodded to the gallery, and two or three shook hands,and others went out chewing the fragments of herb they had taken fromthe sweet herbs lying about.
for several days and nights after he was sentenced i tookno rest except when i fell asleep in my chair, but was wholly absorbedin these appeals.
and after i had sent them in, i could not keep awayfrom the places where they were, but felt as if they were morehopeful and less desperate when i was near them.
in this unreasonablerestlessness and pain of mind i would roam the streets of an evening,wandering by those offices and houses where i had left the petitions.
the daily visits i could make him were shortened now, and he was morestrictly kept.
seeing, or fancying, that i was suspected of an intentionof carrying poison to him, i asked to be searched before i sat downat his bedside, and told the officer who was always there, that i waswilling to do anything that would assure him of the singleness of mydesigns.
nobody was hard with him or with me.
there was duty to bedone, and it was done, but not harshly.
as the days went on, i noticed more and more that he would lie placidlylooking at the white ceiling, with an absence of light in his faceuntil some word of mine brightened it for an instant, and then it wouldsubside again.
sometimes he was almost or quite unable to speak, thenhe would answer me with slight pressures on my hand, and i grew tounderstand his meaning very well.
the number of the days had risen to ten, when i saw a greater changein him than i had seen yet.
his eyes were turned towards the door, andlighted up as i entered.
not to lose a moment of the time.
do what he would,and love me though he did, the light left his face ever and again, and afilm came over the placid look at the white ceiling.
he smiled, and i understood his touch tomean that he wished to lift my hand, and lay it on his breast.
i laid itthere, and he smiled again, and put both his hands upon it.
the change,though it was made without noise, drew back the film from the placidlook at the white ceiling, and he looked most affectionately at me.
she is living now.
she is a ladyand very beautiful.
then,he gently let it sink upon his breast again, with his own hands lying onit.
the placid look at the white ceiling came back, and passed away, andhis head dropped quietly on his breast.
i oughtrather to write that i should have been alarmed if i had had energy andconcentration enough to help me to the clear perception of any truthbeyond the fact that i was falling very ill.
but the vapor of a limekiln would come between me and them,disordering them all, and it was through the vapor at last that i sawtwo men looking at me.
when i next attendedto them, they were standing a little off from the bed, looking at me.
istill lay there.
if you take me from here, i think i shall dieby the way.
that i sometimesstruggled with real people, in the belief that they were murderers, andthat i would all at once comprehend that they meant to do me good, andwould then sink exhausted in their arms, and suffer them to lay medown, i also knew at the time.
after i had turned the worst point of my illness, i began to notice thatwhile all its other features changed, this one consistent feature didnot change.
whoever came about me, still settled down into joe.
i openedmy eyes in the night, and i saw, in the great chair at the bedside, joe.
i sank back onmy pillow after drinking, and the face that looked so hopefully andtenderly upon me was the face of joe.
tellme of my ingratitude.
so i kissed his hand, and layquiet, while he proceeded to indite a note to biddy, with my love in it.
evidently biddy had taught joe to write.
as i lay in bed looking at him,it made me, in my weak state, cry again with pleasure to see thepride with which he set about his letter.
he had a curious idea that the inkstand wason the side of him where it was not, and constantly dipped his pen intospace, and seemed quite satisfied with the result.
not to make joe uneasy by talking too much, even if i had been able totalk much, i deferred asking him about miss havisham until next day.
heshook his head when i then asked him if she had recovered.
but she hadwrote out a little coddleshell in her own hand a day or two afore theaccident, leaving a cool four thousand to mr.
this account gave me great joy, as it perfected the only good thing ihad done.
miss georgiana, she have twentypound down.
i was slowto gain strength, but i did slowly and surely become less weak, and joestayed with me, and i fancied i was little pip again.
for the tenderness of joe was so beautifully proportioned to my need,that i was like a child in his hands.
he would sit and talk to me in theold confidence, and with the old simplicity, and in the old unassertiveprotecting way, so that i would half believe that all my life since thedays of the old kitchen was one of the mental troubles of the fever thatwas gone.
he did everything for me except the household work, for whichhe had engaged a very decent woman, after paying off the laundress onhis first arrival.
and when the daycame, and an open carriage was got into the lane, joe wrapped me up,took me in his arms, carried me down to it, and put me in, as if i werestill the small helpless creature to whom he had so abundantly given ofthe wealth of his great nature.
and joe got in beside me, and we drove away together into the country,where the rich summer growth was already on the trees and on the grass,and sweet summer scents filled all the air.
more composure came to me after a while, and we talked as we usedto talk, lying on the grass at the old battery.
there was no changewhatever in joe.
we had not yetmade any allusion to my change of fortune, nor did i know how much ofmy late history he was acquainted with.
i was so doubtful of myself now,and put so much trust in him, that i could not satisfy myself whether iought to refer to it when he did not.
i call uponyou, sir, therefore, to pint out the good.
theerfore, think no more of it as betwixt two sech, and donot let us pass remarks upon onnecessary subjects.
butwhether joe knew how poor i was, and how my great expectations hadall dissolved, like our own marsh mists before the sun, i could notunderstand.
i too hadfallen into the old ways, only happy and thankful that he let me.
now, you shall see me walk back bymyself.
joe gave it me, but wasthoughtful.
he would want to help me out of his littlesavings, i knew, and i knew that he ought not to help me, and that imust not suffer him to do it.
it was a thoughtful evening with both of us.
as icleared, joe cleared, and it seemed as though he had sympatheticallyarrived at a resolution too.
we had a quiet day on the sunday, and we rode out into the country, andthen walked in the fields.
i would tell him beforebreakfast.
i went to his room, andhe was not there.
not only was he not there, but his box was gone.
ever the best of friends.
down to that moment, i had vainly supposed that mycreditor had withdrawn, or suspended proceedings until i should be quiterecovered.
and, biddy, it shall restwith you to say whether i shall work at the forge with joe, or whether ishall try for any different occupation down in this country, or whetherwe shall go away to a distant place where an opportunity awaits me whichi set aside, when it was offered, until i knew your answer.
and now,dear biddy, if you can tell me that you will go through the world withme, you will surely make it a better world for me, and me a better manfor it, and i will try hard to make it a better world for you.
after three days more of recovery, i went down tothe old place to put it in execution.
and how i sped in it is all i haveleft to tell.
chapter lviiithe tidings of my high fortunes having had a heavy fall had got downto my native place and its neighborhood before i got there.
whereas the boar had cultivatedmy good opinion with warm assiduity when i was coming into property,the boar was exceedingly cool on the subject now that i was going out ofproperty.
it was evening when i arrived, much fatigued by the journey i had sooften made so easily.
but i had as sound a sleep in that lodging asin the most superior accommodation the boar could have given me, and thequality of my dreams was about the same as in the best bedroom.
early in the morning, while my breakfast was getting ready, i strolledround by satis house.
there were printed bills on the gate and on bitsof carpet hanging out of the windows, announcing a sale by auction ofthe household furniture and effects, next week.
the house itself was tobe sold as old building materials, and pulled down.
other lots were markedoff on other parts of the structure, and the ivy had been torn down tomake room for the inscriptions, and much of it trailed low in the dustand was withered already.
pumblechook conversing with the landlord.
william, bring a watercress.
pumblechook, sighing and noddinghis head several times, as if he might have expected that, and as ifabstinence from watercresses were consistent with my downfall.
the simple fruits of the earth.
pumblechook continued to stand overme, staring fishily and breathing noisily, as he always did.
pumblechook, aloud.
you are right, young man.
for once you are right.
the waiter appeared to beparticularly affected.
thisis him as i have seen brought up by hand.
i will name nonames, joseph, but so they are pleased to call him up town, and i haveseen that man.
he knows it, joseph, as none can.
you do not know it, joseph, having nocall to know it, but that man do.
it was that, in my being brought low, he saw the finger ofprovidence.
he knowed that finger when he saw joseph, and he saw itplain.
it pinted out this writing, joseph.
but that man said he didnot repent of what he had done, joseph.
it was right to doit, it was kind to do it, it was benevolent to do it, and he would do itagain.
but, it was only the pleasanter to turn to biddy and to joe, whosegreat forbearance shone more brightly than before, if that could be,contrasted with this brazen pretender.
i went towards them slowly, formy limbs were weak, but with a sense of increasing relief as i drewnearer to them, and a sense of leaving arrogance and untruthfulnessfurther and further behind.
the june weather was delicious.
the sky was blue, the larks were soaringhigh over the green corn, i thought all that countryside more beautifuland peaceful by far than i had ever known it to be yet.
many pleasantpictures of the life that i would lead there, and of the change for thebetter that would come over my character when i had a guiding spirit atmy side whose simple faith and clear home wisdom i had proved, beguiledmy way.
somehopeful notion of seeing her, busily engaged in her daily duties, beforeshe saw me, had been in my mind and was defeated.
longafter i ought to have heard it, and long after i had fancied i heard itand found it but a fancy, all was still.
almost fearing, without knowing why, to come in view of the forge, i sawit at last, and saw that it was closed.
but the house was not deserted, and the best parlor seemed to be in use,for there were white curtains fluttering in its window, and the windowwas open and gay with flowers.
i went softly towards it, meaning to peepover the flowers, when joe and biddy stood before me, arm in arm.
at first biddy gave a cry, as if she thought it was my apparition, butin another moment she was in my embrace.
within a month, i had quitted england,and within two months i was clerk to clarriker and co.
, and within fourmonths i assumed my first undivided responsibility.
so hetold it, and herbert was as much moved as amazed, and the dear fellowand i were not the worse friends for the long concealment.
i must notleave it to be supposed that we were ever a great house, or that we mademints of money.
we were not in a grand way of business, but we had agood name, and worked for our profits, and did very well.
i touched itso softly that i was not heard, and looked in unseen.
and i tookhim down to the churchyard, and set him on a certain tombstone there,and he showed me from that elevation which stone was sacred to thememory of philip pirrip, late of this parish, and also georgiana, wifeof the above.
i am alreadyquite an old bachelor.
i had heard of her as leading a most unhappy life, and as beingseparated from her husband, who had used her with great cruelty, and whohad become quite renowned as a compound of pride, avarice, brutality,and meanness.
but, what with loitering on the way to look at old objects and to thinkof old times, the day had quite declined when i came to the place.
there was no house now, no brewery, no building whatever left, but thewall of the old garden.
the cleared space had been enclosed with a roughfence, and looking over it, i saw that some of the old ivy had struckroot anew, and was growing green on low quiet mounds of ruin.
a gate inthe fence standing ajar, i pushed it open, and went in.
a cold silvery mist had veiled the afternoon, and the moon was not yetup to scatter it.
but, the stars were shining beyond the mist, and themoon was coming, and the evening was not dark.
i could trace out whereevery part of the old house had been, and where the brewery had been,and where the gates, and where the casks.
i had done so, and was lookingalong the desolate garden walk, when i beheld a solitary figure in it.
the figure showed itself aware of me, as i advanced.
it had been movingtowards me, but it stood still.
as i drew nearer, i saw it to be thefigure of a woman.
as i drew nearer yet, it was about to turn away, whenit stopped, and let me come up with it.
i wonder you know me.
the moon began to rise, and i thought ofthe pressure on my hand when i had spoken the last words he had heard onearth.
estella was the next to break the silence that ensued between us.
it is the only possession i have notrelinquished.
everything else has gone from me, little by little, but ihave kept this.
it was the subject of the only determined resistance imade in all the wretched years.
i came here to take leave of it before its change.
there was a long hard time when i kept far from methe remembrance of what i had thrown away when i was quite ignorantof its worth.
but since my duty has not been incompatible with theadmission of that remembrance, i have given it a place in my heart.
and we were silent again until she spoke.
i am very glad to do so.
to me,the remembrance of our last parting has been ever mournful and painful.
be as considerate and good to me as you were, and tell me we arefriends.
projectgutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if youcharge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission.
if youdo not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with therules is very easy.
you may use this ebook for nearly any purposesuch as creation of derivative works, reports, performances andresearch.
redistribution issubject to the trademark license, especially commercialredistribution.
it may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
nearly all the individual works in thecollection are in the public domain in the united states.
if anindividual work is in the public domain in the united states and you arelocated in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you fromcopying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivativeworks based on the work as long as all references to project gutenbergare removed.
the copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work.
copyright laws in most countries are ina constant state of change.
the foundation makes no representations concerningthe copyright status of any work in any country outside the unitedstates.
you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including anyword processing or hypertext form.
you agree that the foundation, thetrademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not beliable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive orincidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of suchdamage.
if youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium withyour written explanation.
the person or entity that provided you withthe defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of arefund.
if you received the work electronically, the person or entityproviding it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity toreceive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
if the second copyis also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without furtheropportunities to fix the problem.
some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates thelaw of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall beinterpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted bythe applicable state law.
the invalidity or unenforceability of anyprovision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
it existsbecause of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations frompeople in all walks of life.
contributions to the project gutenbergliterary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extentpermitted by u.
, but its volunteers and employees are scatteredthroughout numerous locations.
compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements.
we do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
orgwhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the united states.
laws alone swamp our small staff.
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses.
donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
professor michael s.
unless a copyright notice is included.
thus, we do not necessarilykeep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
