i lived there twoyears and two months.
at present i am a sojourner in civilized lifeagain.
i should not obtrude my affairs so much on the notice of my readers ifvery particular inquiries had not been made by my townsmen concerningmy mode of life, which some would call impertinent, though they do notappear to me at all impertinent, but, considering the circumstances,very natural and pertinent.
i will therefore ask those of my readers who feel noparticular interest in me to pardon me if i undertake to answer some ofthese questions in this book.
we commonly do not remember that it is, afterall, always the first person that is speaking.
i should not talk somuch about myself if there were anybody else whom i knew as well.
unfortunately, i am confined to this theme by the narrowness of myexperience.
perhaps these pages are moreparticularly addressed to poor students.
as for the rest of my readers,they will accept such portions as apply to them.
i trust that none willstretch the seams in putting on the coat, for it may do good service tohim whom it fits.
better if they had been born in theopen pasture and suckled by a wolf, that they might have seen withclearer eyes what field they were called to labor in.
but men labor under a mistake.
the better part of the man is soonplowed into the soil for compost.
by a seeming fate, commonly callednecessity, they are employed, as it says in an old book, laying uptreasures which moth and rust will corrupt and thieves break throughand steal.
most men, even in this comparatively free country, through mereignorance and mistake, are so occupied with the factitious cares andsuperfluously coarse labors of life that its finer fruits cannot beplucked by them.
their fingers, from excessive toil, are too clumsy andtremble too much for that.
he has no time to be anything but a machine.
the finest qualities of our nature, like the bloom on fruits, can bepreserved only by the most delicate handling.
yet we do not treatourselves nor one another thus tenderly.
some of you, we all know, are poor, find it hard to live, aresometimes, as it were, gasping for breath.
i have no doubt that some ofyou who read this book are unable to pay for all the dinners which youhave actually eaten, or for the coats and shoes which are fast wearingor are already worn out, and have come to this page to spend borrowedor stolen time, robbing your creditors of an hour.
i sometimes wonder that we can be so frivolous, i may almost say, as toattend to the gross but somewhat foreign form of servitude called negroslavery, there are so many keen and subtle masters that enslave bothnorth and south.
public opinion is a weak tyrantcompared with our own private opinion.
what a man thinks of himself,that it is which determines, or rather indicates, his fate.
the mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.
what is calledresignation is confirmed desperation.
from the desperate city you gointo the desperate country, and have to console yourself with thebravery of minks and muskrats.
a stereotyped but unconscious despair isconcealed even under what are called the games and amusements ofmankind.
there is no play in them, for this comes after work.
but it isa characteristic of wisdom not to do desperate things.
when we consider what, to use the words of the catechism, is the chiefend of man, and what are the true necessaries and means of life, itappears as if men had deliberately chosen the common mode of livingbecause they preferred it to any other.
yet they honestly think thereis no choice left.
but alert and healthy natures remember that the sunrose clear.
it is never too late to give up our prejudices.
no way ofthinking or doing, however ancient, can be trusted without proof.
whatold people say you cannot do you try and find that you can.
old deedsfor old people, and new deeds for new.
age is no better, hardly so well, qualified for aninstructor as youth, for it has not profited so much as it has lost.
one may almost doubt if the wisest man has learned any thing ofabsolute value by living.
ihave lived some thirty years on this planet, and i have yet to hear thefirst syllable of valuable or even earnest advice from my seniors.
theyhave told me nothing, and probably cannot tell me any thing to thepurpose.
if i have anyexperience which i think valuable, i am sure to reflect that this mymentors said nothing about.
some things are really necessaries of life in somecircles, the most helpless and diseased, which in others are luxuriesmerely, and in others still are entirely unknown.
the whole ground of human life seems to some to have been gone over bytheir predecessors, both the heights and the valleys, and all things tohave been cared for.
undoubtedly the very tedium and ennui which presume to haveexhausted the variety and the joys of life are as old as adam.
if i had remembered this it would have prevented somemistakes.
this was not the light in which i hoed them.
the greater part of what my neighbors call good i believe in my soul tobe bad, and if i repent of anything, it is very likely to be my goodbehavior.
one generation abandons the enterprises ofanother like stranded vessels.
i think that we may safely trust a good deal more than we do.
we maywaive just so much care of ourselves as we honestly bestow elsewhere.
nature is as well adapted to our weakness as to our strength.
theincessant anxiety and strain of some is a well nigh incurable form ofdisease.
so thoroughly andsincerely are we compelled to live, reverencing our life, and denyingthe possibility of change.
let us consider for a moment what most of the trouble and anxiety whichi have referred to is about, and how much it is necessary that we betroubled, or, at least, careful.
to many creatures there is in this sense but one necessary of life,food.
none of the brute creation requires more thanfood and shelter.
we observe cats and dogs acquiring thesame second nature.
in coldweather we eat more, in warm less.
the grand necessity, then, for our bodies, is to keep warm, to keep thevital heat in us.
the summer, in some climates, makespossible to man a sort of elysian life.
, and for the studious, lamplight, stationery, andaccess to a few books, rank next to necessaries, and can all beobtained at a trifling cost.
most of the luxuries, and many of the so called comforts of life, arenot only not indispensable, but positive hindrances to the elevation ofmankind.
with respect to luxuries and comforts, the wisest have everlived a more simple and meagre life than the poor.
the ancientphilosophers, chinese, hindoo, persian, and greek, were a class thanwhich none has been poorer in outward riches, none so rich in inward.
we know not much about them.
the same is true of the more modern reformers andbenefactors of their race.
none can be an impartial or wise observer ofhuman life but from the vantage ground of what we should call voluntarypoverty.
of a life of luxury the fruit is luxury, whether inagriculture, or commerce, or literature, or art.
there are nowadaysprofessors of philosophy, but not philosophers.
yet it is admirable toprofess because it was once admirable to live.
to be a philosopher isnot merely to have subtle thoughts, nor even to found a school, but soto love wisdom as to live according to its dictates, a life ofsimplicity, independence, magnanimity, and trust.
it is to solve someof the problems of life, not only theoretically, but practically.
they make shift to live merely byconformity, practically as their fathers did, and are in no sense theprogenitors of a nobler race of men.
he is not fed, sheltered, clothed, warmed,like his contemporaries.
the soil, it appears, is suited to the seed, for it has sent itsradicle downward, and it may now send its shoot upward also withconfidence.
there are somewho complain most energetically and inconsolably of any, because theyare, as they say, doing their duty.
i also have in my mind thatseemingly wealthy, but most terribly impoverished class of all, whohave accumulated dross, but know not how to use it, or get rid of it,and thus have forged their own golden or silver fetters.
i will only hint at some ofthe enterprises which i have cherished.
many are the travellers i have spoken concerning them,describing their tracks and what calls they answered to.
i have met oneor two who had heard the hound, and the tramp of the horse, and evenseen the dove disappear behind a cloud, and they seemed as anxious torecover them as if they had lost them themselves.
it is true, i never assisted the sun materially in hisrising, but, doubt not, it was of the last importance only to bepresent at it.
if it had concerned either of the politicalparties, depend upon it, it would have appeared in the gazette with theearliest intelligence.
for a long time i was reporter to a journal, of no very widecirculation, whose editor has never yet seen fit to print the bulk ofmy contributions, and, as is too common with writers, i got only mylabor for my pains.
however, in this case my pains were their ownreward.
i have watered the redhuckleberry, the sand cherry and the nettle tree, the red pine and theblack ash, the white grape and the yellow violet, which might havewithered else in dry seasons.
in short, i went on thus for a long time, i may say it withoutboasting, faithfully minding my business, till it became more and moreevident that my townsmen would not after all admit me into the list oftown officers, nor make my place a sinecure with a moderate allowance.
my accounts, which i can swear to have kept faithfully, i have, indeed,never got audited, still less accepted, still less paid and settled.
however, i have not set my heart on that.
the life which men praise and regard as successful is but onekind.
i determined to go into business atonce, and not wait to acquire the usual capital, using such slendermeans as i had already got.
if your trade is with the celestial empire,then some small counting house on the coast, in some salem harbor, willbe fixture enough.
you will export such articles as the countryaffords, purely native products, much ice and pine timber and a littlegranite, always in native bottoms.
these will be good ventures.
petersburg from the face of the earth.
as this business was to be entered into without the usual capital, itmay not be easy to conjecture where those means, that will still beindispensable to every such undertaking, were to be obtained.
as forclothing, to come at once to the practical part of the question,perhaps we are led oftener by the love of novelty, and a regard for theopinions of men, in procuring it, than by a true utility.
let him whohas work to do recollect that the object of clothing is, first, toretain the vital heat, and secondly, in this state of society, to covernakedness, and he may judge how much of any necessary or important workmay be accomplished without adding to his wardrobe.
kings and queenswho wear a suit but once, though made by some tailor or dressmaker totheir majesties, cannot know the comfort of wearing a suit that fits.
they are no better than wooden horses to hang the clean clothes on.
but even if therent is not mended, perhaps the worst vice betrayed is improvidence.
it would be easier for them to hobble to town with a broken legthan with a broken pantaloon.
weknow but few men, a great many coats and breeches.
it is aninteresting question how far men would retain their relative rank ifthey were divested of their clothes.
but they yield such respect,numerous as they are, are so far heathen, and need to have a missionarysent to them.
perhaps weshould never procure a new suit, however ragged or dirty the old, untilwe have so conducted, so enterprised or sailed in some way, that wefeel like new men in the old, and that to retain it would be likekeeping new wine in old bottles.
our moulting season, like that of thefowls, must be a crisis in our lives.
the loon retires to solitaryponds to spend it.
otherwise we shallbe found sailing under false colors, and be inevitably cashiered atlast by our own opinion, as well as that of mankind.
we don garment after garment, as if we grew like exogenous plants byaddition without.
i believe that all races at someseasons wear something equivalent to the shirt.
she spins andweaves and cuts with full authority.
isometimes despair of getting anything quite simple and honest done inthis world by the help of men.
they would have to be passed through apowerful press first, to squeeze their old notions out of them, so thatthey would not soon get upon their legs again, and then there would besome one in the company with a maggot in his head, hatched from an eggdeposited there nobody knows when, for not even fire kills thesethings, and you would have lost your labor.
nevertheless, we will notforget that some egyptian wheat was handed down to us by a mummy.
on the whole, i think that it cannot be maintained that dressing has inthis or any country risen to the dignity of an art.
at present men makeshift to wear what they can get.
every generationlaughs at the old fashions, but follows religiously the new.
we areamused at beholding the costume of henry viii.
, or queen elizabeth, asmuch as if it was that of the king and queen of the cannibal islands.
all costume off a man is pitiful or grotesque.
it is only the seriouseye peering from and the sincere life passed within it, which restrainlaughter and consecrate the costume of any people.
let harlequin betaken with a fit of the colic and his trappings will have to serve thatmood too.
when the soldier is hit by a cannon ball rags are as becomingas purple.
the childish and savage taste of men and women for new patterns keepshow many shaking and squinting through kaleidoscopes that they maydiscover the particular figure which this generation requires today.
the manufacturers have learned that this taste is merely whimsical.
oftwo patterns which differ only by a few threads more or less of aparticular color, the one will be sold readily, the other lie on theshelf, though it frequently happens that after the lapse of a seasonthe latter becomes the most fashionable.
comparatively, tattooing isnot the hideous custom which it is called.
i cannot believe that our factory system is the best mode by which menmay get clothing.
in the long run men hit only what theyaim at.
therefore, though they should fail immediately, they had betteraim at something high.
as for a shelter, i will not deny that this is now a necessary of life,though there are instances of men having done without it for longperiods in colder countries than this.
in our climate, in the summer, it was formerly almostsolely a covering at night.
man was notmade so large limbed and robust but that he must seek to narrow hisworld, and wall in a space such as fitted him.
adamand eve, according to the fable, wore the bower before other clothes.
man wanted a home, a place of warmth, or comfort, first of physicalwarmth, then the warmth of the affections.
we may imagine a time when, in the infancy of the human race, someenterprising mortal crept into a hollow in a rock for shelter.
everychild begins the world again, to some extent, and loves to stay outdoors, even in wet and cold.
it plays house, as well as horse, havingan instinct for it.
from the cave we have advanced to roofs ofpalm leaves, of bark and boughs, of linen woven and stretched, of grassand straw, of boards and shingles, of stones and tiles.
at last, weknow not what it is to live in the open air, and our lives are domesticin more senses than we think.
from the hearth to the field is a greatdistance.
it would be well perhaps if we were to spend more of our daysand nights without any obstruction between us and the celestial bodies,if the poet did not speak so much from under a roof, or the saint dwellthere so long.
birds do not sing in caves, nor do doves cherish theirinnocence in dovecots.
however, if one designs to construct a dwelling house, it behooves himto exercise a little yankee shrewdness, lest after all he find himselfin a workhouse, a labyrinth without a clue, a museum, an almshouse, aprison, or a splendid mausoleum instead.
consider first how slight ashelter is absolutely necessary.
i have seen penobscot indians, in thistown, living in tents of thin cotton cloth, while the snow was nearly afoot deep around them, and i thought that they would be glad to have itdeeper to keep out the wind.
formerly, when how to get my livinghonestly, with freedom left for my proper pursuits, was a questionwhich vexed me even more than it does now, for unfortunately i ambecome somewhat callous, i used to see a large box by the railroad, sixfeet long by three wide, in which the laborers locked up their tools atnight, and it suggested to me that every man who was hard pushed mightget such a one for a dollar, and, having bored a few auger holes in it,to admit the air at least, get into it when it rained and at night, andhook down the lid, and so have freedom in his love, and in his soul befree.
this did not appear the worst, nor by any means a despicablealternative.
many a man is harassed to death to pay the rent of a larger andmore luxurious box who would not have frozen to death in such a box asthis.
i am far from jesting.
economy is a subject which admits of beingtreated with levity, but it cannot so be disposed of.
a comfortablehouse for a rude and hardy race, that lived mostly out of doors, wasonce made here almost entirely of such materials as nature furnishedready to their hands.
the meaner sort are covered with mats which they make ofa kind of bulrush, and are also indifferently tight and warm, but notso good as the former.
some i have seen, sixty or a hundred feetlong and thirty feet broad.
i have often lodged in their wigwams,and found them as warm as the best english houses.
the indians hadadvanced so far as to regulate the effect of the wind by a matsuspended over the hole in the roof and moved by a string.
in the large towns and cities, where civilization especiallyprevails, the number of those who own a shelter is a very smallfraction of the whole.
the rest pay an annual tax for this outsidegarment of all, become indispensable summer and winter, which would buya village of indian wigwams, but now helps to keep them poor as long asthey live.
if we suppose him to pay arent instead, this is but a doubtful choice of evils.
but perhaps a man is not required to bury himself.
but i wishto show at what a sacrifice this advantage is at present obtained, andto suggest that we may possibly so live as to secure all the advantagewithout suffering any of the disadvantage.
it is true, the encumbrances sometimes outweighthe value of the farm, so that the farm itself becomes one greatencumbrance, and still a man is found to inherit it, being wellacquainted with it, as he says.
on applying to the assessors, i amsurprised to learn that they cannot at once name a dozen in the townwho own their farms free and clear.
if you would know the history ofthese homesteads, inquire at the bank where they are mortgaged.
the manwho has actually paid for his farm with labor on it is so rare thatevery neighbor can point to him.
i doubt if there are three such men inconcord.
but this puts an infinitely worse face on the matter, andsuggests, beside, that probably not even the other three succeed insaving their souls, but are perchance bankrupt in a worse sense thanthey who fail honestly.
bankruptcy and repudiation are the springboardsfrom which much of our civilization vaults and turns its somersets, butthe savage stands on the unelastic plank of famine.
the farmer is endeavoring to solve the problem of a livelihood by aformula more complicated than the problem itself.
to get hisshoestrings he speculates in herds of cattle.
with consummate skill hehas set his trap with a hair spring to catch comfort and independence,and then, as he turned away, got his own leg into it.
i know one or two families, at least, in this town, who,for nearly a generation, have been wishing to sell their houses in theoutskirts and move into the village, but have not been able toaccomplish it, and only death will set them free.
while civilization has beenimproving our houses, it has not equally improved the men who are toinhabit them.
it has created palaces, but it was not so easy to createnoblemen and kings.
the luxury of oneclass is counterbalanced by the indigence of another.
the masonwho finishes the cornice of the palace returns at night perchance to ahut not so good as a wigwam.
it is a mistake to suppose that, in acountry where the usual evidences of civilization exist, the conditionof a very large body of the inhabitants may not be as degraded as thatof savages.
i refer to the degraded poor, not now to the degraded rich.
it certainly is fair to look at that class by whose laborthe works which distinguish this generation are accomplished.
such too,to a greater or less extent, is the condition of the operatives ofevery denomination in england, which is the great workhouse of theworld.
or i could refer you to ireland, which is marked as one of thewhite or enlightened spots on the map.
contrast the physical conditionof the irish with that of the north american indian, or the south seaislander, or any other savage race before it was degraded by contactwith the civilized man.
their condition onlyproves what squalidness may consist with civilization.
i hardly needrefer now to the laborers in our southern states who produce the stapleexports of this country, and are themselves a staple production of thesouth.
most men appear never to have considered what a house is, and areactually though needlessly poor all their lives because they think thatthey must have such a one as their neighbors have.
it is the luxurious and dissipated who set the fashions which the herdso diligently follow.
the traveller who stops at the best houses, socalled, soon discovers this, for the publicans presume him to be asardanapalus, and if he resigned himself to their tender mercies hewould soon be completely emasculated.
i would rather sit on a pumpkin and have it all to myself than becrowded on a velvet cushion.
when he was refreshed with food and sleep he contemplatedhis journey again.
he dwelt, as it were, in a tent in this world, andwas either threading the valleys, or crossing the plains, or climbingthe mountain tops.
we now no longer camp as for a night, but have settleddown on earth and forgotten heaven.
we have built for this world afamily mansion, and for the next a family tomb.
there is not a nail to hang a picture on, nor a shelfto receive the bust of a hero or a saint.
without factitious support, man is sure to come to earth againbeyond that distance.
the cart before the horse is neither beautifulnor useful.
in the course of three or four years, when the countrybecame adapted to agriculture, they built themselves handsome houses,spending on them several thousands.
though we are not so degenerate but that we might possibly live in acave or a wigwam or wear skins today, it certainly is better to acceptthe advantages, though so dearly bought, which the invention andindustry of mankind offer.
i speak understandingly on thissubject, for i have made myself acquainted with it both theoreticallyand practically.
with a little more wit we might use these materials soas to become richer than the richest now are, and make our civilizationa blessing.
the civilized man is a more experienced and wiser savage.
but to make haste to my own experiment.
it was a pleasant hillsidewhere i worked, covered with pine woods, through which i looked out onthe pond, and a small open field in the woods where pines and hickorieswere springing up.
the ice in the pond was not yet dissolved, thoughthere were some open spaces, and it was all dark colored and saturatedwith water.
i had previously seen the snakes in frosty mornings in my path withportions of their bodies still numb and inflexible, waiting for the sunto thaw them.
i hewed the main timbers six inches square, most of the studs on twosides only, and the rafters and floor timbers on one side, leaving therest of the bark on, so that they were just as straight and muchstronger than sawed ones.
each stick was carefully mortised or tenonedby its stump, for i had borrowed other tools by this time.
before i had done i was more the friendthan the foe of the pine tree, though i had cut down some of them,having become better acquainted with it.
sometimes a rambler in thewood was attracted by the sound of my axe, and we chatted pleasantlyover the chips which i had made.
by the middle of april, for i made no haste in my work, but rather madethe most of it, my house was framed and ready for the raising.
i hadalready bought the shanty of james collins, an irishman who worked onthe fitchburg railroad, for boards.
when i called to see it he was notat home.
i walked about the outside, at first unobserved from within,the window was so deep and high.
it was of small dimensions, with apeaked cottage roof, and not much else to be seen, the dirt beingraised five feet all around as if it were a compost heap.
the roof wasthe soundest part, though a good deal warped and made brittle by thesun.
came to the door and asked me to view itfrom the inside.
the hens were driven in by my approach.
it was dark,and had a dirt floor for the most part, dank, clammy, and aguish, onlyhere a board and there a board which would not bear removal.
shelighted a lamp to show me the inside of the roof and the walls, andalso that the board floor extended under the bed, warning me not tostep into the cellar, a sort of dust hole two feet deep.
the bargain was soon concluded, for james had in themeanwhile returned.
it were well, he said, tobe there early, and anticipate certain indistinct but wholly unjustclaims on the score of ground rent and fuel.
this he assured me was theonly encumbrance.
at six i passed him and his family on the road.
i took down this dwelling the same morning, drawing the nails, andremoved it to the pond side by small cartloads, spreading the boards onthe grass there to bleach and warp back again in the sun.
one earlythrush gave me a note or two as i drove along the woodland path.
he was there to representspectatordom, and help make this seemingly insignificant event one withthe removal of the gods of troy.
i dug my cellar in the side of a hill sloping to the south, where awoodchuck had formerly dug his burrow, down through sumach andblackberry roots, and the lowest stain of vegetation, six feet squareby seven deep, to a fine sand where potatoes would not freeze in anywinter.
i took particular pleasure in this breaking of ground,for in almost all latitudes men dig into the earth for an equabletemperature.
under the most splendid house in the city is still to befound the cellar where they store their roots as of old, and long afterthe superstructure has disappeared posterity remark its dent in theearth.
the house is still but a sort of porch at the entrance of aburrow.
at length, in the beginning of may, with the help of some of myacquaintances, rather to improve so good an occasion for neighborlinessthan from any necessity, i set up the frame of my house.
no man wasever more honored in the character of his raisers than i.
they aredestined, i trust, to assist at the raising of loftier structures oneday.
when it stormed before mybread was baked, i fixed a few boards over the fire, and sat under themto watch my loaf, and passed some pleasant hours in that way.
in thosedays, when my hands were much employed, i read but little, but theleast scraps of paper which lay on the ground, my holder, ortablecloth, afforded me as much entertainment, in fact answered thesame purpose as the iliad.
it would be worth the while to build still more deliberately than idid, considering, for instance, what foundation a door, a window, acellar, a garret, have in the nature of man, and perchance neverraising any superstructure until we found a better reason for it thanour temporal necessities even.
we belong tothe community.
true, there are architects so called in this country, and i have heardof one at least possessed with the idea of making architecturalornaments have a core of truth, a necessity, and hence a beauty, as ifit were a revelation to him.
all very well perhaps from his point ofview, but only a little better than the common dilettantism.
asentimental reformer in architecture, he began at the cornice, not atthe foundation.
the enemywill find it out.
he may turn pale when the trial comes.
this manseemed to me to lean over the cornice, and timidly whisper his halftruth to the rude occupants who really knew it better than he.
a great proportionof architectural ornaments are literally hollow, and a september galewould strip them off, like borrowed plumes, without injury to thesubstantials.
much it concerns a man, forsooth, how a few sticks are slanted over himor under him, and what colors are daubed upon his box.
before winter i built a chimney, and shingled the sides of my house,which were already impervious to rain, with imperfect and sappyshingles made of the first slice of the log, whose edges i was obligedto straighten with a plane.
refuse shingles for roof sides,.
i intend to build me a house which will surpass any on the main streetin concord in grandeur and luxury, as soon as it pleases me as much andwill cost me no more than my present one.
i thus found that the student who wishes for a shelter can obtain onefor a lifetime at an expense not greater than the rent which he nowpays annually.
i willendeavor to speak a good word for the truth.
i cannot but think that if wehad more true wisdom in these respects, not only less education wouldbe needed, because, forsooth, more would already have been acquired,but the pecuniary expense of getting an education would in a greatmeasure vanish.
those conveniences which the student requires atcambridge or elsewhere cost him or somebody else ten times as great asacrifice of life as they would with proper management on both sides.
those things for which the most money is demanded are never the thingswhich the student most wants.
tuition, for instance, is an importantitem in the term bill, while for the far more valuable education whichhe gets by associating with the most cultivated of his contemporariesno charge is made.
thestudent who secures his coveted leisure and retirement bysystematically shirking any labor necessary to man obtains but anignoble and unprofitable leisure, defrauding himself of the experiencewhich alone can make leisure fruitful.
the consequence is, that while heis reading adam smith, ricardo, and say, he runs his father in debtirretrievably.
thedevil goes on exacting compound interest to the last for his earlyshare and numerous succeeding investments in them.
our inventions arewont to be pretty toys, which distract our attention from seriousthings.
either is in such a predicament as the manwho was earnest to be introduced to a distinguished deaf woman, butwhen he was presented, and one end of her ear trumpet was put into hishand, had nothing to say.
as if the main object were to talk fast andnot to talk sensibly.
i doubt if flying childers ever carrieda peck of corn to mill.
i have learned that the swiftesttraveller is he that goes afoot.
i say to my friend, suppose we try whowill get there first.
i remember when wages were sixtycents a day for laborers on this very road.
instead of going to fitchburg, you willbe working here the greater part of the day.
such is the universal law, which no man can ever outwit, and withregard to the railroad even we may say it is as broad as it is long.
tomake a railroad round the world available to all mankind is equivalentto grading the whole surface of the planet.
he should havegone up garret at once.
before i finished my house, wishing to earn ten or twelve dollars bysome honest and agreeable method, in order to meet my unusual expenses,i planted about two acres and a half of light and sandy soil near itchiefly with beans, but also a small part with potatoes, corn, peas,and turnips.
the whole lot contains eleven acres, mostly growing up topines and hickories, and was sold the preceding season for eightdollars and eight cents an acre.
i got out several cords of stumps in ploughing, which supplied mewith fuel for a long time, and left small circles of virgin mould,easily distinguishable through the summer by the greater luxuriance ofthe beans there.
the dead and for the most part unmerchantable woodbehind my house, and the driftwood from the pond, have supplied theremainder of my fuel.
i was obliged to hire a team and a man for theploughing, though i held the plough myself.
the seedcorn was given me.
this never costs anything to speak of, unless youplant more than enough.
i got twelve bushels of beans, and eighteenbushels of potatoes, beside some peas and sweet corn.
the yellow cornand turnips were too late to come to any thing.
i desire to speakimpartially on this point, and as one not interested in the success orfailure of the present economical and social arrangements.
i was moreindependent than any farmer in concord, for i was not anchored to ahouse or farm, but could follow the bent of my genius, which is a verycrooked one, every moment.
beside being better off than they already,if my house had been burned or my crops had failed, i should have beennearly as well off as before.
i am wont to think that men are not so much the keepers of herds asherds are the keepers of men, the former are so much the freer.
certainly no nation that livedsimply in all respects, that is, no nation of philosophers, wouldcommit so great a blunder as to use the labor of animals.
true, therenever was and is not likely soon to be a nation of philosophers, nor ami certain it is desirable that there should be.
man thus not onlyworks for the animal within him, but, for a symbol of this, he worksfor the animal without him.
though we have many substantial houses ofbrick or stone, the prosperity of the farmer is still measured by thedegree to which the barn overshadows the house.
a simple and independent minddoes not toil at the bidding of any prince.
genius is not a retainer toany emperor, nor is its material silver, or gold, or marble, except toa trifling extent.
nationsare possessed with an insane ambition to perpetuate the memory ofthemselves by the amount of hammered stone they leave.
ilove better to see stones in place.
the grandeur of thebes was a vulgargrandeur.
most of the stone a nation hammers goes towardits tomb only.
it buries itself alive.
as for the pyramids, there isnothing to wonder at in them so much as the fact that so many men couldbe found degraded enough to spend their lives constructing a tomb forsome ambitious booby, whom it would have been wiser and manlier to havedrowned in the nile, and then given his body to the dogs.
i mightpossibly invent some excuse for them and him, but i have no time forit.
as for the religion and love of art of the builders, it is much thesame all the world over, whether the building be an egyptian temple orthe united states bank.
it costs more than it comes to.
the mainspringis vanity, assisted by the love of garlic and bread and butter.
when the thirty centuries begin to look down onit, mankind begin to look up at it.
but to proceed with my statistics.
, eight months,.
, eight months,.
these statistics, however accidental and therefore uninstructive theymay appear, as they have a certain completeness, have a certain valuealso.
nothing was given me of which i have not rendered some account.
it was, for nearly two years afterthis, rye and indian meal without yeast, potatoes, rice, a very littlesalt pork, molasses, and salt, and my drink water.
it was fit that ishould live on rice, mainly, who loved so well the philosophy of india.
to meet the objections of some inveterate cavillers, i may as wellstate, that if i dined out occasionally, as i always had done, and itrust shall have opportunities to do again, it was frequently to thedetriment of my domestic arrangements.
but the dining out, being, as ihave stated, a constant element, does not in the least affect acomparative statement like this.
i give the latinon account of the savoriness of the trivial name.
in cold weather it was no little amusement to bake several small loavesof this in succession, tending and turning them as carefully as anegyptian his hatching eggs.
they were a real cereal fruit which iripened, and they had to my senses a fragrance like that of other noblefruits, which i kept in as long as possible by wrapping them in cloths.
it issimpler and more respectable to omit it.
man is an animal who more thanany other can adapt himself to all climates and circumstances.
neitherdid i put any sal soda, or other acid or alkali, into my bread.
itwould seem that i made it according to the recipe which marcus porciuscato gave about two centuries before christ.
manus mortariumque bene lavato.
ubi bene subegeris,defingito, coquitoque sub testu.
wash your hands and trough well.
put the meal into thetrough, add water gradually, and knead it thoroughly.
not a word about leaven.
but i did not always use thisstaff of life.
at one time, owing to the emptiness of my purse, i sawnone of it for more than a month.
every new englander might easily raise all his own breadstuffs in thisland of rye and indian corn, and not depend on distant and fluctuatingmarkets for them.
yet so far are we from simplicity and independencethat, in concord, fresh and sweet meal is rarely sold in the shops, andhominy and corn in a still coarser form are hardly used by any.
for themost part the farmer gives to his cattle and hogs the grain of his ownproducing, and buys flour, which is at least no more wholesome, at agreater cost, at the store.
i do not learn thatthe indians ever troubled themselves to go after it.
thus i could avoid all trade and barter, so far as my food wasconcerned, and having a shelter already, it would only remain to getclothing and fuel.
butas it was, i considered that i enhanced the value of the land bysquatting on it.
if theycannot understand that, they cannot understand much that i have to say.
the squirrel tribe tried thesame and succeeded.
the human race is interested in these experiments,though a few old women who are incapacitated for them, or who own theirthirds in mills, may be alarmed.
none is so poorthat he need sit on a pumpkin.
that is shiftlessness.
there is a plentyof such chairs as i like best in the village garrets to be had fortaking them away.
indeed, the more you have of such things the poorer you are.
he was a lucky fox thatleft his tail in the trap.
the muskrat will gnaw his third leg off tobe free.
no wonder man has lost his elasticity.
i think that the man is at a dead set who has got through aknot hole or gateway where his sledge load of furniture cannot followhim.
throw away the first three at least.
it wouldsurpass the powers of a well man nowadays to take up his bed and walk,and i should certainly advise a sick one to lay down his bed and run.
if i have got to drag my trap, i will takecare that it be a light one and do not nip me in a vital part.
i would observe, by the way, that it costs me nothing for curtains, fori have no gazers to shut out but the sun and moon, and i am willingthat they should look in.
the moon will not sour milk nor taint meat ofmine, nor will the sun injure my furniture or fade my carpet, and if heis sometimes too warm a friend, i find it still better economy toretreat behind some curtain which nature has provided, than to add asingle item to the details of housekeeping.
a lady once offered me amat, but as i had no room to spare within the house, nor time to sparewithin or without to shake it, i declined it, preferring to wipe myfeet on the sod before my door.
it is best to avoid the beginnings ofevil.
among the rest was a dried tapeworm.
theneighbors eagerly collected to view them, bought them all, andcarefully transported them to their garrets and dust holes, to liethere till their estates are settled, when they will start again.
whena man dies he kicks the dust.
afterhaving taken medicine, and fasted for three days, all the fire in thetown is extinguished.
during this fast they abstain from thegratification of every appetite and passion whatever.
for more than five years i maintained myself thus solely by the laborof my hands, and i found, that by working about six weeks in a year, icould meet all the expenses of living.
the whole of my winters, as wellas most of my summers, i had free and clear for study.
iwas actually afraid that i might by that time be doing what is called agood business.
as i preferred some things to others, and especially valued my freedom,as i could fare hard and yet succeed well, i did not wish to spend mytime in earning rich carpets or other fine furniture, or delicatecookery, or a house in the grecian or the gothic style just yet.
ifthere are any to whom it is no interruption to acquire these things,and who know how to use them when acquired, i relinquish to them thepursuit.
it is not necessary that aman should earn his living by the sweat of his brow, unless he sweatseasier than i do.
the youth may build or plant or sail, only lethim not be hindered from doing that which he tells me he would like todo.
we may not arrive at our portwithin a calculable period, but we would preserve the true course.
undoubtedly, in this case, what is true for one is truer still for athousand, as a large house is not proportionally more expensive than asmall one, since one roof may cover, one cellar underlie, and one wallseparate several apartments.
but for my part, i preferred the solitarydwelling.
i heard it proposed lately that two young men should traveltogether over the world, the one without money, earning his means as hewent, before the mast and behind the plow, the other carrying a bill ofexchange in his pocket.
theywould part at the first interesting crisis in their adventures.
but all this is very selfish, i have heard some of my townsmen say.
iconfess that i have hitherto indulged very little in philanthropicenterprises.
i have made some sacrifices to a sense of duty, and amongothers have sacrificed this pleasure also.
however, when i have thought to indulge myself in thisrespect, and lay their heaven under an obligation by maintainingcertain poor persons in all respects as comfortably as i maintainmyself, and have even ventured so far as to make them the offer, theyhave one and all unhesitatingly preferred to remain poor.
while mytownsmen and women are devoted in so many ways to the good of theirfellows, i trust that one at least may be spared to other and lesshumane pursuits.
you must have a genius for charity as well as for anything else.
moreover, i have tried it fairly, and, strange as it may seem, amsatisfied that it does not agree with my constitution.
men say, practically, begin where you are and suchas you are, without aiming mainly to become of more worth, and withkindness aforethought go about doing good.
if i were to preach at allin this strain, i should say rather, set about being good.
as if thesun should stop when he had kindled his fires up to the splendor of amoon or a star of the sixth magnitude, and go about like a robingoodfellow, peeping in at every cottage window, inspiring lunatics, andtainting meats, and making darkness visible, instead of steadilyincreasing his genial heat and beneficence till he is of suchbrightness that no mortal can look him in the face, and then, and inthe mean while too, going about the world in his own orbit, doing itgood, or rather, as a truer philosophy has discovered, the world goingabout him getting good.
there is no odor so bad as that which arises from goodness tainted.
itis human, it is divine, carrion.
i can find you a newfoundland dog thatwill do as much.
the jesuits were quite balked by those indians who, being burned at thestake, suggested new modes of torture to their tormentors.
be sure that you give the poor the aid they most need, though it beyour example which leaves them far behind.
if you give money, spendyourself with it, and do not merely abandon it to them.
we make curiousmistakes sometimes.
often the poor man is not so cold and hungry as heis dirty and ragged and gross.
it is partly his taste, and not merelyhis misfortune.
if you give him money, he will perhaps buy more ragswith it.
this ducking was the verything he needed.
there are a thousand hacking at the branches of evilto one who is striking at the root, and it may be that he who bestowsthe largest amount of time and money on the needy is doing the most byhis mode of life to produce that misery which he strives in vain torelieve.
some show theirkindness to the poor by employing them in their kitchens.
society recovers only a tenth part of theproperty then.
the kind uncles and aunts of therace are more esteemed than its true spiritual fathers and mothers.
ionce heard a reverend lecturer on england, a man of learning andintelligence, after enumerating her scientific, literary, and politicalworthies, shakespeare, bacon, cromwell, milton, newton, and others,speak next of her christian heroes, whom, as if his profession requiredit of him, he elevated to a place far above all the rest, as thegreatest of the great.
they were penn, howard, and mrs.
every onemust feel the falsehood and cant of this.
i would not subtract any thing from the praise that is due tophilanthropy, but merely demand justice for all who by their lives andworks are a blessing to mankind.
those plants of whose greenness withered we make herb tea forthe sick, serve but a humble use, and are most employed by quacks.
his goodnessmust not be a partial and transitory act, but a constant superfluity,which costs him nothing and of which he is unconscious.
this is acharity that hides a multitude of sins.
we should impart our courage, andnot our despair, our health and ease, and not our disease, and takecare that this does not spread by contagion.
i never dreamed of any enormity greater than i have committed.
inever knew, and never shall know, a worse man than myself.
i believe that what so saddens the reformer is not his sympathy withhis fellows in distress, but, though he be the holiest son of god, ishis private ail.
let this be righted, let the spring come to him, themorning rise over his couch, and he will forsake his generouscompanions without apology.
if you should ever be betrayedinto any of these philanthropies, do not let your left hand know whatyour right hand does, for it is not worth knowing.
take your time, and set about some freelabor.
our manners have been corrupted by communication with the saints.
one would say that even the prophets and redeemers had ratherconsoled the fears than confirmed the hopes of man.
there is nowhererecorded a simple and irrepressible satisfaction with the gift of life,any memorable praise of god.
if, then, we would indeed restore mankind bytruly indian, botanic, magnetic, or natural means, let us first be assimple and well as nature ourselves, dispel the clouds which hang overour own brows, and take up a little life into our pores.
do not stay tobe an overseer of the poor, but endeavor to become one of the worthiesof the world.
carewwhere i lived, and what i lived forat a certain season of our life we are accustomed to consider everyspot as the possible site of a house.
i have thus surveyed the countryon every side within a dozen miles of where i live.
in imagination ihave bought all the farms in succession, for all were to be bought, andi knew their price.
wherever i sat, there imight live, and the landscape radiated from me accordingly.
i discoveredmany a site for a house not likely to be soon improved, which somemight have thought too far from the village, but to my eyes the villagewas too far from it.
the future inhabitants of this region, wherever they may place theirhouses, may be sure that they have been anticipated.
now, to speak the truth, i had but tencents in the world, and it surpassed my arithmetic to tell, if i wasthat man who had ten cents, or who had a farm, or ten dollars, or alltogether.
i found thus that i had been arich man without any damage to my poverty.
but i retained thelandscape, and i have since annually carried off what it yieldedwithout a wheelbarrow.
why, the owner does not know it for manyyears when a poet has put his farm in rhyme, the most admirable kind ofinvisible fence, has fairly impounded it, milked it, skimmed it, andgot all the cream, and left the farmer only the skimmed milk.
i was in haste to buy it, before the proprietorfinished getting out some rocks, cutting down the hollow apple trees,and grubbing up some young birches which had sprung up in the pasture,or, in short, had made any more of his improvements.
but it turned out as ihave said.
many think that seeds improve with age.
but i would sayto my fellows, once for all, as long as possible live free anduncommitted.
it makes but little difference whether you are committedto a farm or the county jail.
the oftener you go there the more it willplease you, if it is good.
as i have said, i do not propose to write an ode todejection, but to brag as lustily as chanticleer in the morning,standing on his roost, if only to wake my neighbors up.
the upright white hewn studs andfreshly planed door and window casings gave it a clean and airy look,especially in the morning, when its timbers were saturated with dew, sothat i fancied that by noon some sweet gum would exude from them.
to myimagination it retained throughout the day more or less of this auroralcharacter, reminding me of a certain house on a mountain which i hadvisited the year before.
this was an airy and unplastered cabin, fit toentertain a travelling god, and where a goddess might trail hergarments.
the winds which passed over my dwelling were such as sweepover the ridges of mountains, bearing the broken strains, or celestialparts only, of terrestrial music.
olympus is but the outside of the earth every where.
with this moresubstantial shelter about me, i had made some progress toward settlingin the world.
this frame, so slightly clad, was a sort ofcrystallization around me, and reacted on the builder.
it wassuggestive somewhat as a picture in outlines.
i did not need to gooutdoors to take the air, for the atmosphere within had lost none ofits freshness.
it was not so much within doors as behind a door where isat, even in the rainiest weather.
for the first week, whenever i looked out on the pond itimpressed me like a tarn high up on the side of a mountain, its bottomfar above the surface of other lakes, and, as the sun arose, i saw itthrowing off its nightly clothing of mist, and here and there, bydegrees, its soft ripples or its smooth reflecting surface wasrevealed, while the mists, like ghosts, were stealthily withdrawing inevery direction into the woods, as at the breaking up of some nocturnalconventicle.
the very dew seemed to hang upon the trees later into theday than usual, as on the sides of mountains.
from a hill top near by, where the wood hadbeen recently cut off, there was a pleasing vista southward across thepond, through a wide indentation in the hills which form the shorethere, where their opposite sides sloping toward each other suggested astream flowing out in that direction through a wooded valley, butstream there was none.
that way i looked between and over the neargreen hills to some distant and higher ones in the horizon, tinged withblue.
but in other directions, even from thispoint, i could not see over or beyond the woods which surrounded me.
itis well to have some water in your neighborhood, to give buoyancy toand float the earth.
one value even of the smallest well is, that whenyou look into it you see that earth is not continent but insular.
thisis as important as that it keeps butter cool.
though the view from my door was still more contracted, i did not feelcrowded or confined in the least.
there was pasture enough for myimagination.
both place and time were changed, and i dwelt nearer to those parts ofthe universe and to those eras in history which had most attracted me.
where i lived was as far off as many a region viewed nightly byastronomers.
idiscovered that my house actually had its site in such a withdrawn, butforever new and unprofaned, part of the universe.
if it were worth thewhile to settle in those parts near to the pleiades or the hyades, toaldebaran or altair, then i was really there, or at an equal remotenessfrom the life which i had left behind, dwindled and twinkling with asfine a ray to my nearest neighbor, and to be seen only in moonlessnights by him.
i have beenas sincere a worshipper of aurora as the greeks.
morning brings back the heroic ages.
i was as muchaffected by the faint hum of a mosquito making its invisible andunimaginable tour through my apartment at earliest dawn, when i wassitting with door and windows open, as i could be by any trumpet thatever sang of fame.
the morning, which is themost memorable season of the day, is the awakening hour.
that manwho does not believe that each day contains an earlier, more sacred,and auroral hour than he has yet profaned, has despaired of life, andis pursuing a descending and darkening way.
after a partial cessationof his sensuous life, the soul of man, or its organs rather, arereinvigorated each day, and his genius tries again what noble life itcan make.
all memorable events, i should say, transpire in morning timeand in a morning atmosphere.
all poets and heroes,like memnon, are the children of aurora, and emit their music atsunrise.
to him whose elastic and vigorous thought keeps pace with thesun, the day is a perpetual morning.
it matters not what the clocks sayor the attitudes and labors of men.
morning is when i am awake andthere is a dawn in me.
moral reform is the effort to throw off sleep.
if they hadnot been overcome with drowsiness, they would have performed something.
to be awake is to bealive.
i have never yet met a man who was quite awake.
i know of no more encouraging factthan the unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by aconscious endeavor.
to affect thequality of the day, that is the highest of arts.
every man is tasked tomake his life, even in its details, worthy of the contemplation of hismost elevated and critical hour.
if we refused, or rather used up, suchpaltry information as we get, the oracles would distinctly inform ushow this might be done.
i went to the woods because i wished to live deliberately, to frontonly the essential facts of life, and see if i could not learn what ithad to teach, and not, when i came to die, discover that i had notlived.
our life is fritteredaway by detail.
an honest man has hardly need to count more than histen fingers, or in extreme cases he may add his ten toes, and lump therest.
simplify, simplify.
our life is like agerman confederacy, made up of petty states, with its boundary foreverfluctuating, so that even a german cannot tell you how it is bounded atany moment.
it lives too fast.
the rails are laid on them, and they arecovered with sand, and the cars run smoothly over them.
they are soundsleepers, i assure you.
and when they run over aman that is walking in his sleep, a supernumerary sleeper in the wrongposition, and wake him up, they suddenly stop the cars, and make a hueand cry about it, as if this were an exception.
i am glad to know thatit takes a gang of men for every five miles to keep the sleepers downand level in their beds as it is, for this is a sign that they maysometime get up again.
i think thatthere are very few important communications made through it.
and i am sure that i never read any memorable news in a newspaper.
yet not a few are greedy after this gossip.
if one may judge who rarely looks intothe newspapers, nothing new does ever happen in foreign parts, a frenchrevolution not excepted.
if we respected only what is inevitable and has a rightto be, music and poetry would resound along the streets.
this is alwaysexhilarating and sublime.
by closing the eyes and slumbering, andconsenting to be deceived by shows, men establish and confirm theirdaily life of routine and habit everywhere, which still is built onpurely illusory foundations.
children, who play life, discern its truelaw and relations more clearly than men, who fail to live it worthily,but who think that they are wiser by experience, that is, by failure.
men esteem truth remote, in the outskirts of the system, behindthe farthest star, before adam and after the last man.
in eternitythere is indeed something true and sublime.
but all these times andplaces and occasions are now and here.
god himself culminates in thepresent moment, and will never be more divine in the lapse of all theages.
and we are enabled to apprehend at all what is sublime and nobleonly by the perpetual instilling and drenching of the reality thatsurrounds us.
let us spend our lives in conceiving then.
the poet or the artist neveryet had so fair and noble a design but some of his posterity at leastcould accomplish it.
weather this danger and you are safe, for the restof the way is down hill.
with unrelaxed nerves, with morning vigor,sail by it, looking another way, tied to the mast like ulysses.
if theengine whistles, let it whistle till it is hoarse for its pains.
ifyou stand right fronting and face to face to a fact, you will see thesun glimmer on both its surfaces, as if it were a cimeter, and feel itssweet edge dividing you through the heart and marrow, and so you willhappily conclude your mortal career.
be it life or death, we crave onlyreality.
its thincurrent slides away, but eternity remains.
i cannot count one.
iknow not the first letter of the alphabet.
i have always beenregretting that i was not as wise as the day i was born.
i do not wish to be any more busy with my hands than is necessary.
myhead is hands and feet.
i feel all my best faculties concentrated init.
readingwith a little more deliberation in the choice of their pursuits, allmen would perhaps become essentially students and observers, forcertainly their nature and destiny are interesting to all alike.
that time which we really improve, or whichis improvable, is neither past, present, nor future.
incessant laborwith my hands, at first, for i had my house to finish and my beans tohoe at the same time, made more study impossible.
yet i sustainedmyself by the prospect of such reading in future.
the modern cheap and fertile press, with all itstranslations, has done little to bring us nearer to the heroic writersof antiquity.
they seem as solitary, and the letter in which they areprinted as rare and curious, as ever.
it is worth the expense ofyouthful days and costly hours, if you learn only some words of anancient language, which are raised out of the trivialness of thestreet, to be perpetual suggestions and provocations.
it is not in vainthat the farmer remembers and repeats the few latin words which he hasheard.
we might aswell omit to study nature because she is old.
to read well, that is, toread true books in a true spirit, is a noble exercise, and one thatwill task the reader more than any exercise which the customs of theday esteem.
it requires a training such as the athletes underwent, thesteady intention almost of the whole life to this object.
books must beread as deliberately and reservedly as they were written.
it is notenough even to be able to speak the language of that nation by whichthey are written, for there is a memorable interval between the spokenand the written language, the language heard and the language read.
theone is commonly transitory, a sound, a tongue, a dialect merely, almostbrutish, and we learn it unconsciously, like the brutes, of ourmothers.
they had not learnedthe nobler dialects of greece and rome, but the very materials on whichthey were written were waste paper to them, and they prized instead acheap contemporary literature.
but when the several nations of europehad acquired distinct though rude written languages of their own,sufficient for the purposes of their rising literatures, then firstlearning revived, and scholars were enabled to discern from thatremoteness the treasures of antiquity.
theastronomers forever comment on and observe them.
they are notexhalations like our daily colloquies and vaporous breath.
what iscalled eloquence in the forum is commonly found to be rhetoric in thestudy.
no wonder that alexander carried the iliad with him on his expeditionsin a precious casket.
a written word is the choicest of relics.
it issomething at once more intimate with us and more universal than anyother work of art.
it is the work of art nearest to life itself.
two thousandsummers have imparted to the monuments of grecian literature, as to hermarbles, only a maturer golden and autumnal tint, for they have carriedtheir own serene and celestial atmosphere into all lands to protectthem against the corrosion of time.
books are the treasured wealth ofthe world and the fit inheritance of generations and nations.
books,the oldest and the best, stand naturally and rightfully on the shelvesof every cottage.
they have no cause of their own to plead, but whilethey enlighten and sustain the reader his common sense will not refusethem.
their authors are a natural and irresistible aristocracy in everysociety, and, more than kings or emperors, exert an influence onmankind.
they only talk of forgetting them whonever knew them.
it will be soon enough to forget them when we have thelearning and the genius which will enable us to attend to andappreciate them.
that age will be rich indeed when those relics whichwe call classics, and the still older and more than classic but evenless known scriptures of the nations, shall have still furtheraccumulated, when the vaticans shall be filled with vedas andzendavestas and bibles, with homers and dantes and shakespeares, andall the centuries to come shall have successively deposited theirtrophies in the forum of the world.
by such a pile we may hope to scaleheaven at last.
the works of the great poets have never yet been read by mankind, foronly great poets can read them.
they have only been read as themultitude read the stars, at most astrologically, not astronomically.
i think that having learned our letters we should read the best that isin literature, and not be forever repeating our a b abs, and words ofone syllable, in the fourth or fifth classes, sitting on the lowest andforemost form all our lives.
most men are satisfied if they read orhear read, and perchance have been convicted by the wisdom of one goodbook, the bible, and for the rest of their lives vegetate and dissipatetheir faculties in what is called easy reading.
there is a work inseveral volumes in our circulating library entitled little reading,which i thought referred to a town of that name which i had not beento.
there are those who, like cormorants and ostriches, can digest allsorts of this, even after the fullest dinner of meats and vegetables,for they suffer nothing to be wasted.
if others are the machines toprovide this provender, they are the machines to read it.
theresult is dulness of sight, a stagnation of the vital circulations, anda general deliquium and sloughing off of all the intellectualfaculties.
the best books are not read even by those who are called good readers.
this is about as much as the college bredgenerally do or aspire to do, and they take an english paper for thepurpose.
i aspire to be acquainted with wiser men than this our concord soil hasproduced, whose names are hardly known here.
we should be as good as the worthies ofantiquity, but partly by first knowing how good they were.
it is not all books that are as dull as their readers.
there areprobably words addressed to our condition exactly, which, if we couldreally hear and understand, would be more salutary than the morning orthe spring to our lives, and possibly put a new aspect on the face ofthings for us.
how many a man has dated a new era in his life from thereading of a book.
the book exists for us perchance which will explainour miracles and reveal new ones.
the at present unutterable things wemay find somewhere uttered.
moreover, with wisdom we shalllearn liberality.
we boast that we belong to the nineteenth century and are making themost rapid strides of any nation.
but consider how little this villagedoes for its own culture.
i do not wish to flatter my townsmen, nor tobe flattered by them, for that will not advance either of us.
we spend more on almost any article of bodily aliment orailment than on our mental aliment.
it is time that we had uncommonschools, that we did not leave off our education when we begin to bemen and women.
in this country, thevillage should in some respects take the place of the nobleman ofeurope.
it should be the patron of the fine arts.
it is rich enough.
itwants only the magnanimity and refinement.
it can spend money enough onsuch things as farmers and traders value, but it is thought utopian topropose spending money for things which more intelligent men know to beof far more worth.
letthe reports of all the learned societies come to us, and we will see ifthey know any thing.
new england can hire all the wise men in the world tocome and teach her, and board them round the while, and not beprovincial at all.
instead ofnoblemen, let us have noble villages of men.
if it is necessary, omitone bridge over the river, go round a little there, and throw one archat least over the darker gulf of ignorance which surrounds us.
soundsbut while we are confined to books, though the most select and classic,and read only particular written languages, which are themselves butdialects and provincial, we are in danger of forgetting the languagewhich all things and events speak without metaphor, which alone iscopious and standard.
much is published, but little printed.
the rayswhich stream through the shutter will be no longer remembered when theshutter is wholly removed.
no method nor discipline can supersede thenecessity of being forever on the alert.
nay, i often didbetter than this.
there were times when i could not afford to sacrificethe bloom of the present moment to any work, whether of the head orhands.
i love a broad margin to my life.
igrew in those seasons like corn in the night, and they were far betterthan any work of the hands would have been.
they were not timesubtracted from my life, but so much over and above my usual allowance.
i realized what the orientals mean by contemplation and the forsakingof works.
for the most part, i minded not how the hours went.
instead ofsinging like the birds, i silently smiled at my incessant good fortune.
as the sparrow had its trill, sitting on the hickory before my door, sohad i my chuckle or suppressed warble which he might hear out of mynest.
a man must find his occasions in himself, it istrue.
the natural day is very calm, and will hardly reprove hisindolence.
i had this advantage, at least, in my mode of life, over those who wereobliged to look abroad for amusement, to society and the theatre, thatmy life itself was become my amusement and never ceased to be novel.
itwas a drama of many scenes and without an end.
if we were always indeedgetting our living, and regulating our lives according to the last andbest mode we had learned, we should never be troubled with ennui.
follow your genius closely enough, and it will not fail to show you afresh prospect every hour.
housework was a pleasant pastime.
they seemed glad to get outthemselves, and as if unwilling to be brought in.
i was sometimestempted to stretch an awning over them and take my seat there.
my house was on the side of a hill, immediately on the edge of thelarger wood, in the midst of a young forest of pitch pines andhickories, and half a dozen rods from the pond, to which a narrowfootpath led down the hill.
itasted them out of compliment to nature, though they were scarcelypalatable.
its broad pinnate tropical leaf waspleasant though strange to look on.
in august, thelarge masses of berries, which, when in flower, had attracted many wildbees, gradually assumed their bright velvety crimson hue, and by theirweight again bent down and broke the tender limbs.
for i did not live soout of the world as that boy who, as i hear, was put out to a farmer inthe east part of the town, but ere long ran away and came home again,quite down at the heel and homesick.
i usually go to the village along its causeway, and am,as it were, related to society by this link.
as they come under one horizon, they shout their warning to get off thetrack to the other, heard sometimes through the circles of two towns.
with such huge and lumbering civility the countryhands a chair to the city.
all the indian huckleberry hills arestripped, all the cranberry meadows are raked into the city.
i watch the passage of the morning cars with the same feeling that i dothe rising of the sun, which is hardly more regular.
their train ofclouds stretching far behind and rising higher and higher, going toheaven while the cars are going to boston, conceals the sun for aminute and casts my distant field into the shade, a celestial trainbeside which the petty train of cars which hugs the earth is but thebarb of the spear.
the stabler of the iron horse was up early thiswinter morning by the light of the stars amid the mountains, to fodderand harness his steed.
fire, too, was awakened thus early to put thevital heat in him and get him off.
or perchance, at evening, i hear him in his stable blowing offthe superfluous energy of the day, that he may calm his nerves and coolhis liver and brain for a few hours of iron slumber.
the startings and arrivals of the cars are now the epochs inthe village day.
they go and come with such regularity and precision,and their whistle can be heard so far, that the farmers set theirclocks by them, and thus one well conducted institution regulates awhole country.
there is nostopping to read the riot act, no firing over the heads of the mob, inthis case.
we live the steadier forit.
we are all educated thus to be sons of tell.
the air is full ofinvisible bolts.
every path but your own is the path of fate.
keep onyour own track, then.
what recommends commerce to me is its enterprise and bravery.
it doesnot clasp its hands and pray to jupiter.
i see these men every day goabout their business with more or less courage and content, doing moreeven than they suspect, and perchance better employed than they couldhave consciously devised.
commerce is unexpectedly confident and serene, alert, adventurous, andunwearied.
it is very natural in its methods withal, far more so thanmany fantastic enterprises and sentimental experiments, and hence itssingular success.
i am refreshed and expanded when the freight trainrattles past me, and i smell the stores which go dispensing their odorsall the way from long wharf to lake champlain, reminding me of foreignparts, of coral reefs, and indian oceans, and tropical climes, and theextent of the globe.
next rolls thomaston lime, a prime lot, which will get faramong the hills before it gets slacked.
it is advertised in thecuttingsville times.
while these things go up other things come down.
the air is filled with the bleating of calvesand sheep, and the hustling of oxen, as if a pastoral valley were goingby.
they will not be in at the death.
their vocation, too, is gone.
their fidelity and sagacity are below parnow.
they will slink back to their kennels in disgrace, or perchancerun wild and strike a league with the wolf and the fox.
so is yourpastoral life whirled past and away.
i will not have my eyesput out and my ears spoiled by its smoke and steam and hissing.
now that the cars are gone by and all the restless world with them, andthe fishes in the pond no longer feel their rumbling, i am more alonethan ever.
for the rest of the long afternoon, perhaps, my meditationsare interrupted only by the faint rattle of a carriage or team alongthe distant highway.
sometimes, on sundays, i heard the bells, the lincoln, acton, bedford,or concord bell, when the wind was favorable, a faint, sweet, and, asit were, natural melody, worth importing into the wilderness.
at asufficient distance over the woods this sound acquires a certainvibratory hum, as if the pine needles in the horizon were the stringsof a harp which it swept.
all sound heard at the greatest possibledistance produces one and the same effect, a vibration of the universallyre, just as the intervening atmosphere makes a distant ridge of earthinteresting to our eyes by the azure tint it imparts to it.
there cameto me in this case a melody which the air had strained, and which hadconversed with every leaf and needle of the wood, that portion of thesound which the elements had taken up and modulated and echoed fromvale to vale.
the echo is, to some extent, an original sound, andtherein is the magic and charm of it.
regularly at half past seven, in one part of the summer, after theevening train had gone by, the whippoorwills chanted their vespers forhalf an hour, sitting on a stump by my door, or upon the ridge pole ofthe house.
they would begin to sing almost with as much precision as aclock, within five minutes of a particular time, referred to thesetting of the sun, every evening.
i had a rare opportunity to becomeacquainted with their habits.
sometimes one would circle round and round me inthe woods a few feet distant as if tethered by a string, when probablyi was near its eggs.
they sang at intervals throughout the night, andwere again as musical as ever just before and about dawn.
their dismal scream is truly benjonsonian.
they give me a new sense of the variety and capacity ofthat nature which is our common dwelling.
i was also serenaded by a hooting owl.
it reminded me ofghouls and idiots and insane howlings.
i rejoice that there are owls.
let them do the idiotic and maniacalhooting for men.
it is a sound admirably suited to swamps and twilightwoods which no day illustrates, suggesting a vast and undevelopednature which men have not recognized.
they represent the stark twilightand unsatisfied thoughts which all have.
all climates agree with brave chanticleer.
he is moreindigenous even than the natives.
his health is ever good, his lungsare sound, his spirits never flag.
not even a lark or an oriole, those mildplantation birds, ever visited my clearing.
no cockerels to crow norhens to cackle in the yard.
i go and come with a strangeliberty in nature, a part of herself.
as i walk along the stony shoreof the pond in my shirt sleeves, though it is cool as well as cloudyand windy, and i see nothing special to attract me, all the elementsare unusually congenial to me.
the bullfrogs trump to usher in thenight, and the note of the whippoorwill is borne on the rippling windfrom over the water.
these small waves raised by the evening windare as remote from storm as the smooth reflecting surface.
though it isnow dark, the wind still blows and roars in the wood, the waves stilldash, and some creatures lull the rest with their notes.
the repose isnever complete.
when i return to my house i find that visitors have been there and lefttheir cards, either a bunch of flowers, or a wreath of evergreen, or aname in pencil on a yellow walnut leaf or a chip.
they who come rarelyto the woods take some little piece of the forest into their hands toplay with by the way, which they leave, either intentionally oraccidentally.
one has peeled a willow wand, woven it into a ring, anddropped it on my table.
i could always tell if visitors had called inmy absence, either by the bended twigs or grass, or the print of theirshoes, and generally of what sex or age or quality they were by someslight trace left, as a flower dropped, or a bunch of grass plucked andthrown away, even as far off as the railroad, half a mile distant, orby the lingering odor of a cigar or pipe.
nay, i was frequentlynotified of the passage of a traveller along the highway sixty rods offby the scent of his pipe.
there is commonly sufficient space about us.
our horizon is never quiteat our elbows.
the thick wood is not just at our door, nor the pond,but somewhat is always clearing, familiar and worn by us, appropriatedand fenced in some way, and reclaimed from nature.
but for the most part it is as solitary where i liveas on the prairies.
it is as much asia or africa as new england.
ihave, as it were, my own sun and moon and stars, and a little world allto myself.
i believe that men are generallystill a little afraid of the dark, though the witches are all hung, andchristianity and candles have been introduced.
yet i experienced sometimes that the most sweet and tender, the mostinnocent and encouraging society may be found in any natural object,even for the poor misanthrope and most melancholy man.
there can be novery black melancholy to him who lives in the midst of nature and hashis senses still.
nothing can rightly compel asimple and brave man to a vulgar sadness.
while i enjoy the friendshipof the seasons i trust that nothing can make life a burden to me.
though it prevents myhoeing them, it is of far more worth than my hoeing.
if it shouldcontinue so long as to cause the seeds to rot in the ground and destroythe potatoes in the low lands, it would still be good for the grass onthe uplands, and, being good for the grass, it would be good for me.
i do notflatter myself, but if it be possible they flatter me.
i have neverfelt lonesome, or in the least oppressed by a sense of solitude, butonce, and that was a few weeks after i came to the woods, when, for anhour, i doubted if the near neighborhood of man was not essential to aserene and healthy life.
to be alone was something unpleasant.
but iwas at the same time conscious of a slight insanity in my mood, andseemed to foresee my recovery.
in the midst of a gentle rain whilethese thoughts prevailed, i was suddenly sensible of such sweet andbeneficent society in nature, in the very pattering of the drops, andin every sound and sight around my house, an infinite and unaccountablefriendliness all at once like an atmosphere sustaining me, as made thefancied advantages of human neighborhood insignificant, and i havenever thought of them since.
every little pine needle expanded andswelled with sympathy and befriended me.
i was so distinctly made awareof the presence of something kindred to me, even in scenes which we areaccustomed to call wild and dreary, and also that the nearest of bloodto me and humanest was not a person nor a villager, that i thought noplace could ever be strange to me again.
i passed it again the other day, and was struck with aweon looking up and beholding that mark, now more distinct than ever,where a terrific and resistless bolt came down out of the harmless skyeight years ago.
this will vary with different natures, but this is the place where awise man will dig his cellar.
any prospect of awakening or coming to life to a dead man makesindifferent all times and places.
the place where that may occur isalways the same, and indescribably pleasant to all our senses.
for themost part we allow only outlying and transient circumstances to makeour occasions.
they are, in fact, the cause of our distraction.
nearestto all things is that power which fashions their being.
it is an ocean of subtileintelligences.
weare not wholly involved in nature.
when the play, it may be the tragedy, of life is over, thespectator goes his way.
it was a kind of fiction, a work of theimagination only, so far as he was concerned.
this doubleness mayeasily make us poor neighbors and friends sometimes.
i find it wholesome to be alone the greater part of the time.
to be incompany, even with the best, is soon wearisome and dissipating.
i loveto be alone.
i never found the companion that was so companionable assolitude.
we are for the most part more lonely when we go abroad amongmen than when we stay in our chambers.
a man thinking or working isalways alone, let him be where he will.
solitude is not measured by themiles of space that intervene between a man and his fellows.
the reallydiligent student in one of the crowded hives of cambridge college is assolitary as a dervish in the desert.
society is commonly too cheap.
we meet at very short intervals, nothaving had time to acquire any new value for each other.
we meet atmeals three times a day, and give each other a new taste of that oldmusty cheese that we are.
we have had to agree on a certain set ofrules, called etiquette and politeness, to make this frequent meetingtolerable and that we need not come to open war.
certainly less frequency would suffice for all important and heartycommunications.
it would be better if there were but one inhabitant to asquare mile, as where i live.
the value of a man is not in his skin,that we should touch him.
i have heard of a man lost in the woods and dying of famine andexhaustion at the foot of a tree, whose loneliness was relieved by thegrotesque visions with which, owing to bodily weakness, his diseasedimagination surrounded him, and which he believed to be real.
so also,owing to bodily and mental health and strength, we may be continuallycheered by a like but more normal and natural society, and come to knowthat we are never alone.
let me suggest a few comparisons, that some one mayconvey an idea of my situation.
i am no more lonely than the loon inthe pond that laughs so loud, or than walden pond itself.
the sun isalone, except in thick weather, when there sometimes appear to be two,but one is a mock sun.
i am no more lonelythan the mill brook, or a weathercock, or the north star, or the southwind, or an april shower, or a january thaw, or the first spider in anew house.
a ruddy andlusty old dame, who delights in all weathers and seasons, and is likelyto outlive all her children yet.
when visitors came in larger and unexpected numbersthere was but the third chair for them all, but they generallyeconomized the room by standing up.
it is surprising how many great menand women a small house will contain.
many of our houses, both public and private, with their almostinnumerable apartments, their huge halls and their cellars for thestorage of wines and other munitions of peace, appear to meextravagantly large for their inhabitants.
they are so vast andmagnificent that the latter seem to be only vermin which infest them.
iam surprised when the herald blows his summons before some tremont orastor or middlesex house, to see come creeping out over the piazza forall inhabitants a ridiculous mouse, which soon again slinks into somehole in the pavement.
one inconvenience i sometimes experienced in so small a house, thedifficulty of getting to a sufficient distance from my guest when webegan to utter the big thoughts in big words.
you want room for yourthoughts to get into sailing trim and run a course or two before theymake their port.
the bullet of your thought must have overcome itslateral and ricochet motion and fallen into its last and steady coursebefore it reaches the ear of the hearer, else it may plough out againthrough the side of his head.
also, our sentences wanted room to unfoldand form their columns in the interval.
individuals, like nations, musthave suitable broad and natural boundaries, even a considerable neutralground, between them.
i have found it a singular luxury to talk acrossthe pond to a companion on the opposite side.
as the conversation began to assume a loftier andgrander tone, we gradually shoved our chairs farther apart till theytouched the wall in opposite corners, and then commonly there was notroom enough.
thither in summer days, when distinguished guests came, i took them,and a priceless domestic swept the floor and dusted the furniture andkept the things in order.
the waste anddecay of physical life, which so often needs repair, seemedmiraculously retarded in such a case, and the vital vigor stood itsground.
so easy is it, though many housekeepers doubt it, to establish new andbetter customs in the place of the old.
you need not rest yourreputation on the dinners you give.
i think i shall never revisit those scenes.
the most ate of them.
another time when winslow visited them, it being a season of plentywith them, there was no deficiency in this respect.
as for men, they will hardly fail one any where.
i met several there under more favorable circumstancesthan i could any where else.
but fewer came to see me on trivialbusiness.
in this respect, my company was winnowed by my mere distancefrom town.
i had withdrawn so far within the great ocean of solitude,into which the rivers of society empty, that for the most part, so faras my needs were concerned, only the finest sediment was depositedaround me.
beside, there were wafted to me evidences of unexplored anduncultivated continents on the other side.
to himhomer was a great writer, though what his writing was about he did notknow.
a more simple and natural man it would be hard to find.
vice anddisease, which cast such a sombre moral hue over the world, seemed tohave hardly any existence for him.
his mirth was without alloy.
sometimes i saw him at his work inthe woods, felling trees, and he would greet me with a laugh ofinexpressible satisfaction, and a salutation in canadian french, thoughhe spoke english as well.
such an exuberance ofanimal spirits had he that he sometimes tumbled down and rolled on theground with laughter at any thing which made him think and tickled him.
in physical endurance andcontentment he was cousin to the pine and the rock.
he had been instructed onlyin that innocent and ineffectual way in which the catholic prieststeach the aborigines, by which the pupil is never educated to thedegree of consciousness, but only to the degree of trust and reverence,and a child is not made a man, but kept a child.
when nature made him,she gave him a strong body and contentment for his portion, and proppedhim on every side with reverence and reliance, that he might live outhis threescore years and ten a child.
he was so genuine andunsophisticated that no introduction would serve to introduce him, morethan if you introduced a woodchuck to your neighbor.
he had got to findhim out as you did.
he would not play any part.
wiser men were demigods to him.
ifyou told him that such a one was coming, he did as if he thought thatany thing so grand would expect nothing of himself, but take all theresponsibility on itself, and let him be forgotten still.
he neverheard the sound of praise.
he particularly reverenced the writer andthe preacher.
their performances were miracles.
when i told him that iwrote considerably, he thought for a long time that it was merely thehandwriting which i meant, for he could write a remarkably good handhimself.
i sometimes found the name of his native parish handsomelywritten in the snow by the highway, with the proper french accent, andknew that he had passed.
i asked him if he ever wished to write histhoughts.
his only books were an almanac and an arithmetic, in which last he wasconsiderably expert.
i loved to sound him on the variousreforms of the day, and he never failed to look at them in the mostsimple and practical light.
he had never heard of such things before.
ifan ox were his property, and he wished to get needles and thread at thestore, he thought it would be inconvenient and impossible soon to go onmortgaging some portion of the creature each time to that amount.
hecould defend many institutions better than any philosopher, because, indescribing them as they concerned him, he gave the true reason fortheir prevalence, and speculation had not suggested to him any other.
one winter day i asked him if he was always satisfied withhimself, wishing to suggest a substitute within him for the priestwithout, and some higher motive for living.
if i suggested any improvement in hismode of life, he merely answered, without expressing any regret, thatit was too late.
yet he thoroughly believed in honesty and the likevirtues.
though hehesitated, and perhaps failed to express himself distinctly, he alwayshad a presentable thought behind.
many a traveller came out of his way to see me and the inside of myhouse, and, as an excuse for calling, asked for a glass of water.
itold them that i drank at the pond, and pointed thither, offering tolend them a dipper.
with respect to wit, i learnedthat there was not much difference between the half and the whole.
the lord had made him so, yet he supposed thelord cared as much for him as for another.
he was ametaphysical puzzle to me.
and, true enough, in proportion as he appeared to humble himselfwas he exalted.
i did not know at first but it was the result of a wisepolicy.
i require of a visitor that he be notactually starving, though he may have the very best appetite in theworld, however he got it.
objects of charity are not guests.
men whodid not know when their visit had terminated, though i went about mybusiness again, answering them from greater and greater remoteness.
menof almost every degree of wit called on me in the migrating season.
i could not but notice some of the peculiarities of my visitors.
girlsand boys and young women generally seemed glad to be in the woods.
theylooked in the pond and at the flowers, and improved their time.
a man sits as many risks as he runs.
i had more cheering visitors than the last.
i came tolove my rows, my beans, though so many more than i wanted.
it isa fine broad leaf to look on.
my auxiliaries are the dews and rainswhich water this dry soil, and what fertility is in the soil itself,which for the most part is lean and effete.
my enemies are worms, cooldays, and most of all woodchucks.
the last have nibbled for me aquarter of an acre clean.
when i was four years old, as i well remember, i was brought fromboston to this my native town, through these very woods and this field,to the pond.
it is one of the oldest scenes stamped on my memory.
almost the samejohnswort springs from the same perennial root in this pasture, andeven i have at length helped to clothe that fabulous landscape of myinfant dreams, and one of the results of my presence and influence isseen in these bean leaves, corn blades, and potato vines.
early in themorning i worked barefooted, dabbling like a plastic artist in the dewyand crumbling sand, but later in the day the sun blistered my feet.
there the sun lighted me to hoe beans, pacing slowly backward andforward over that yellow gravelly upland, between the long green rows,fifteen rods, the one end terminating in a shrub oak copse where icould rest in the shade, the other in a blackberry field where thegreen berries deepened their tints by the time i had made another bout.
as i had little aid from horses orcattle, or hired men or boys, or improved implements of husbandry, iwas much slower, and became much more intimate with my beans thanusual.
but labor of the hands, even when pursued to the verge ofdrudgery, is perhaps never the worst form of idleness.
it has aconstant and imperishable moral, and to the scholar it yields a classicresult.
but soon myhomestead was out of their sight and thought.
this was one field not in mr.
you may wonder what his rigmarole, his amateur paganini performances onone string or on twenty, have to do with your planting, and yet preferit to leached ashes or plaster.
it was a cheap sort of top dressing inwhich i had entire faith.
as i drew a still fresher soil about the rows with my hoe, i disturbedthe ashes of unchronicled nations who in primeval years lived underthese heavens, and their small implements of war and hunting werebrought to the light of this modern day.
they lay mingled with othernatural stones, some of which bore the marks of having been burned byindian fires, and some by the sun, and also bits of pottery and glassbrought hither by the recent cultivators of the soil.
when my hoetinkled against the stones, that music echoed to the woods and the sky,and was an accompaniment to my labor which yielded an instant andimmeasurable crop.
when i paused to lean on myhoe, these sounds and sights i heard and saw anywhere in the row, apart of the inexhaustible entertainment which the country offers.
on gala days the town fires its great guns, which echo like popguns tothese woods, and some waifs of martial music occasionally penetratethus far.
and when the sound died quite away, and the hum had ceased,and the most favorable breezes told no tale, i knew that they had gotthe last drone of them all safely into the middlesex hive, and that nowtheir minds were bent on the honey with which it was smeared.
when there were several bands of musicians, it sounded as if all thevillage was a vast bellows, and all the buildings expanded andcollapsed alternately with a din.
i was determined to knowbeans.
a long war, not with cranes, but with weeds, those trojans whohad sun and rain and dews on their side.
daily the beans saw me come totheir rescue armed with a hoe, and thin the ranks of their enemies,filling up the trenches with weedy dead.
those summer days which some of my contemporaries devoted to the finearts in boston or rome, and others to contemplation in india, andothers to trade in london or new york, i thus, with the other farmersof new england, devoted to husbandry.
it was on the whole arare amusement, which, continued too long, might have become adissipation.
i harvested twelve bushels of beans.
but to be more particular, for it is complained that mr.
beans for seed,.
this is the result of my experience in raising beans.
plant the commonsmall white bush bean about the first of june, in rows three feet byeighteen inches apart, being careful to select fresh round and unmixedseed.
first look out for worms, and supply vacancies by planting anew.
this further experience also i gained.
i said to myself, i will notplant beans and corn with so much industry another summer, but suchseeds, if the seed is not lost, as sincerity, truth, simplicity, faith,innocence, and the like, and see if they will not grow in this soil,even with less toil and manurance, and sustain me, for surely it hasnot been exhausted for these crops.
commonly men will only be brave astheir fathers were brave, or timid.
this generation is very sure toplant corn and beans each new year precisely as the indians didcenturies ago and taught the first settlers to do, as if there were afate in it.
here comes such a subtile and ineffablequality, for instance, as truth or justice, though the slightest amountor new variety of it, along the road.
our ambassadors should beinstructed to send home such seeds as these, and congress help todistribute them over all the land.
we should never stand upon ceremonywith sincerity.
we should never cheat and insult and banish one anotherby our meanness, if there were present the kernel of worth andfriendliness.
we should not meet thus in haste.
it is the premium and the feast which tempt him.
he sacrificesnot to ceres and the terrestrial jove, but to the infernal plutusrather.
by avarice and selfishness, and a grovelling habit, from whichnone of us is free, of regarding the soil as property, or the means ofacquiring property chiefly, the landscape is deformed, husbandry isdegraded with us, and the farmer leads the meanest of lives.
he knowsnature but as a robber.
they all reflect andabsorb his rays alike, and the former make but a small part of theglorious picture which he beholds in his daily course.
in his view theearth is all equally cultivated like a garden.
therefore we shouldreceive the benefit of his light and heat with a corresponding trustand magnanimity.
these beans have results which are not harvested by me.
the true husbandman will cease from anxiety, as thesquirrels manifest no concern whether the woods will bear chestnutsthis year or not, and finish his labor with every day, relinquishingall claim to the produce of his fields, and sacrificing in his mind notonly his first but his last fruits also.
the villageafter hoeing, or perhaps reading and writing, in the forenoon, iusually bathed again in the pond, swimming across one of its coves fora stint, and washed the dust of labor from my person, or smoothed outthe last wrinkle which study had made, and for the afternoon wasabsolutely free.
i went there frequently to observe theirhabits.
i hardly ever failed,when i rambled through the village, to see a row of such worthies,either sitting on a ladder sunning themselves, with their bodiesinclined forward and their eyes glancing along the line this way andthat, from time to time, with a voluptuous expression, or else leaningagainst a barn with their hands in their pockets, like caryatides, asif to prop it up.
they, being commonly out of doors, heard whatever wasin the wind.
these are the coarsest mills, in which all gossip is firstrudely digested or cracked up before it is emptied into finer and moredelicate hoppers within doors.
besides, there was a still more terriblestanding invitation to call at every one of these houses, and companyexpected about these times.
it was very pleasant, when i stayed late in town, to launch myself intothe night, especially if it was dark and tempestuous, and set sail fromsome bright village parlor or lecture room, with a bag of rye or indianmeal upon my shoulder, for my snug harbor in the woods, having made alltight without and withdrawn under hatches with a merry crew ofthoughts, leaving only my outer man at the helm, or even tying up thehelm when it was plain sailing.
it is darker in thewoods, even in common nights, than most suppose.
one very dark night i directed thus on their way two young menwho had been fishing in the pond.
they lived about a mile off throughthe woods, and were quite used to the route.
a day or two after one ofthem told me that they wandered about the greater part of the night,close by their own premises, and did not get home till toward morning,by which time, as there had been several heavy showers in the meanwhile, and the leaves were very wet, they were drenched to their skins.
i have heard of many going astray even in the village streets, when thedarkness was so thick that you could cut it with a knife, as the sayingis.
it is a surprising and memorable, as well as valuableexperience, to be lost in the woods any time.
though he knows thathe has travelled it a thousand times, he cannot recognize a feature init, but it is as strange to him as if it were a road in siberia.
bynight, of course, the perplexity is infinitely greater.
every man has to learn the points of compass again as oftenas he awakes, whether from sleep or any abstraction.
not till we arelost, in other words not till we have lost the world, do we begin tofind ourselves, and realize where we are and the infinite extent of ourrelations.
i had gonedown to the woods for other purposes.
iwas never molested by any person but those who represented the state.
ihad no lock nor bolt but for the desk which held my papers, not even anail to put over my latch or windows.
and yet my house wasmore respected than if it had been surrounded by a file of soldiers.
the tired rambler could rest and warm himself by my fire, the literaryamuse himself with the few books on my table, or the curious, byopening my closet door, see what was left of my dinner, and whatprospect i had of a supper.
yet, though many people of every class camethis way to the pond, i suffered no serious inconvenience from thesesources, and i never missed anything but one small book, a volume ofhomer, which perhaps was improperly gilded, and this i trust a soldierof our camp has found by this time.
i am convinced, that if all menwere to live as simply as i then did, thieving and robbery would beunknown.
these take place only in communities where some have got morethan is sufficient while others have not enough.
the fruits do not yield their true flavor tothe purchaser of them, nor to him who raises them for the market.
thereis but one way to obtain it, yet few take that way.
it is avulgar error to suppose that you have tasted huckleberries who neverplucked them.
the ambrosial andessential part of the fruit is lost with the bloom which is rubbed offin the market cart, and they become mere provender.
our intercourse was thus altogether one ofunbroken harmony, far more pleasing to remember than if it had beencarried on by speech.
in warm evenings i frequently sat in the boat playing the flute, andsaw the perch, which i seemed to have charmed, hovering around me, andthe moon travelling over the ribbed bottom, which was strewed with thewrecks of the forest.
through this, whistling a tune, we took our way to the hauntsof men again.
but now i had made my home by the shore.
at length you slowly raise, pulling hand over hand, somehorned pout squeaking and squirming to the upper air.
it was veryqueer, especially in dark nights, when your thoughts had wandered tovast and cosmogonal themes in other spheres, to feel this faint jerk,which came to interrupt your dreams and link you to nature again.
itseemed as if i might next cast my line upward into the air, as well asdownward into this element, which was scarcely more dense.
thus icaught two fishes as it were with one hook.
they areexclusively woodland.
the first depends more on the light, and follows the sky.
in clearweather, in summer, they appear blue at a little distance, especiallyif agitated, and at a great distance all appear alike.
in stormyweather they are sometimes of a dark slate color.
the sea, however, issaid to be blue one day and green another without any perceptiblechange in the atmosphere.
i have seen our river, when, the landscapebeing covered with snow, both water and ice were almost as green asgrass.
walden is blue atone time and green at another, even from the same point of view.
lyingbetween the earth and the heavens, it partakes of the color of both.
such is the color of its iris.
thisis that portion, also, where in the spring, the ice being warmed by theheat of the sun reflected from the bottom, and also transmitted throughthe earth, melts first and forms a narrow canal about the still frozenmiddle.
it is a vitreous greenish blue, as iremember it, like those patches of the winter sky seen through cloudvistas in the west before sundown.
yet a single glass of its water heldup to the light is as colorless as an equal quantity of air.
how large a body of walden water would be required toreflect a green tint i have never proved.
paddling over it, you may see,many feet beneath the surface the schools of perch and shiners, perhapsonly an inch long, yet the former easily distinguished by theirtransverse bars, and you think that they must be ascetic fish that finda subsistence there.
some think it is bottomless.
the stones extend a rod ortwo into the water, and then the bottom is pure sand, except in thedeepest parts, where there is usually a little sediment, probably fromthe decay of the leaves which have been wafted on to it so manysuccessive falls, and a bright green weed is brought up on anchors evenin midwinter.
successive nationsperchance have drank at, admired, and fathomed it, and passed away, andstill its water is green and pellucid as ever.
eventhen it had commenced to rise and fall, and had clarified its watersand colored them of the hue they now wear, and obtained a patent ofheaven to be the only walden pond in the world and distiller ofcelestial dews.
yet perchance the first who came to this well have left some trace oftheir footsteps.
this is particularly distinct to one standing on the middle ofthe pond in winter, just after a light snow has fallen, appearing as aclear undulating white line, unobscured by weeds and twigs, and veryobvious a quarter of a mile off in many places where in summer it ishardly distinguishable close at hand.
the ornamented grounds of villaswhich will one day be built here may still preserve some trace of this.
the pond rises and falls, but whether regularly or not, and within whatperiod, nobody knows, though, as usual, many pretend to know.
it iscommonly higher in the winter and lower in the summer, though notcorresponding to the general wet and dryness.
i can remember when itwas a foot or two lower, and also when it was at least five feethigher, than when i lived by it.
this same summer the pond has begun to fall again.
it is remarkablethat this fluctuation, whether periodical or not, appears thus torequire many years for its accomplishment.
i have observed one rise anda part of two falls, and i expect that a dozen or fifteen years hencethe water will again be as low as i have ever known it.
the same is true, as far as my observation goes, ofwhite pond.
theseare the lips of the lake on which no beard grows.
it licks its chapsfrom time to time.
some have been puzzled to tell how the shore became so regularly paved.
it has been conjectured that when thehill shook these stones rolled down its side and became the presentshore.
i detect the paver.
the pond was my well ready dug.
in the winter, all waterwhich is exposed to the air is colder than springs and wells which areprotected from it.
moreover, in summer, walden neverbecomes so warm as most water which is exposed to the sun, on accountof its depth.
it was asgood when a week old as the day it was dipped, and had no taste of thepump.
whoever camps for a week in summer by the shore of a pond, needsonly bury a pail of water a few feet deep in the shade of his camp tobe independent of the luxury of ice.
nevertheless, this pondis not very fertile in fish.
its pickerel, though not abundant, are itschief boast.
these are all very firm fish, and weigh more than their sizepromises.
the shiners, pouts, and perch also, and indeed all the fisheswhich inhabit this pond, are much cleaner, handsomer, and firmerfleshed than those in the river and most other ponds, as the water ispurer, and they can easily be distinguished from them.
probably manyichthyologists would make new varieties of some of them.
at most, it tolerates one annual loon.
these are all the animals of consequence which frequent it now.
perhaps they are the nests of the chivin.
these lend a pleasing mystery to the bottom.
the shore is irregular enough not to be monotonous.
there is no rawness norimperfection in its edge there, as where the axe has cleared a part, ora cultivated field abuts on it.
the trees have ample room to expand onthe water side, and each sends forth its most vigorous branch in thatdirection.
there nature has woven a natural selvage, and the eye risesby just gradations from the low shrubs of the shore to the highesttrees.
the water lavesthe shore as it did a thousand years ago.
the fluviatile trees next the shore are the slendereyelashes which fringe it, and the wooded hills and cliffs around areits overhanging brows.
you would think that you could walk dry under it to theopposite hills, and that the swallows which skim over might perch onit.
indeed, they sometimes dive below this line, as it were by mistake,and are undeceived.
it is like molten glasscooled but not congealed, and the few motes in it are pure andbeautiful like the imperfections in glass.
you may often detect a yetsmoother and darker water, separated from the rest as if by aninvisible cobweb, boom of the water nymphs, resting on it.
it is a soothing employment, on one of those fine days in the fallwhen all the warmth of the sun is fully appreciated, to sit on a stumpon such a height as this, overlooking the pond, and study the dimplingcircles which are incessantly inscribed on its otherwise invisiblesurface amid the reflected skies and trees.
over this great expansethere is no disturbance but it is thus at once gently smoothed away andassuaged, as, when a vase of water is jarred, the trembling circlesseek the shore and all is smooth again.
not a fish can leap or aninsect fall on the pond but it is thus reported in circling dimples, inlines of beauty, as it were the constant welling up of its fountain,the gentle pulsing of its life, the heaving of its breast.
the thrillsof joy and thrills of pain are undistinguishable.
nothing so fair, so pure, and at the same time so large, as alake, perchance, lies on the surface of the earth.
it needsno fence.
nations come and go without defiling it.
a field of water betrays the spirit that is in the air.
it iscontinually receiving new life and motion from above.
it isintermediate in its nature between land and sky.
on land only the grassand trees wave, but the water itself is rippled by the wind.
i seewhere the breeze dashes across it by the streaks or flakes of light.
itis remarkable that we can look down on its surface.
we shall, perhaps,look down thus on the surface of air at length, and mark where a stillsubtler spirit sweeps over it.
though i passed over it asgently as possible, the slight undulations produced by my boat extendedalmost as far as i could see, and gave a ribbed appearance to thereflections.
but, as i was looking over the surface, i saw here andthere at a distance a faint glimmer, as if some skater insects whichhad escaped the frosts might be collected there, or, perchance, thesurface, being so smooth, betrayed where a spring welled up from thebottom.
paddling gently to one of these places, i was surprised to findmyself surrounded by myriads of small perch, about five inches long, ofa rich bronze color in the green water, sporting there, and constantlyrising to the surface and dimpling it, sometimes leaving bubbles on it.
in such transparent and seemingly bottomless water, reflecting theclouds, i seemed to be floating through the air as in a balloon, andtheir swimming impressed me as a kind of flight or hovering, as if theywere a compact flock of birds passing just beneath my level on theright or left, their fins, like sails, set all around them.
when i approached carelesslyand alarmed them, they made a sudden splash and rippling with theirtails, as if one had struck the water with a brushy bough, andinstantly took refuge in the depths.
at length the wind rose, the mistincreased, and the waves began to run, and the perch leaped much higherthan before, half out of water, a hundred black points, three incheslong, at once above the surface.
an old man who used to frequent this pond nearly sixty years ago, whenit was dark with surrounding forests, tells me that in those days hesometimes saw it all alive with ducks and other water fowl, and thatthere were many eagles about it.
he used to make a cable for hisanchor of strips of hickory bark tied together.
an old man, a potter,who lived by the pond before the revolution, told him once that therewas an iron chest at the bottom, and that he had seen it.
i was pleased to hear ofthe old log canoe, which took the place of an indian one of the samematerial but more graceful construction, which perchance had first beena tree on the bank, and then, as it were, fell into the water, to floatthere for a generation, the most proper vessel for the lake.
when i first paddled a boat on walden, it was completely surrounded bythick and lofty pine and oak woods, and in some of its coves grapevines had run over the trees next the water and formed bowers underwhich a boat could pass.
the hills which form its shores are so steep,and the woods on them were then so high, that, as you looked down fromthe west end, it had the appearance of an amphitheatre for some kind ofsylvan spectacle.
but since ileft those shores the woodchoppers have still further laid them waste,and now for many a year there will be no more rambling through theaisles of the wood, with occasional vistas through which you see thewater.
my muse may be excused if she is silent henceforth.
many men have been likened to it,but few deserve that honor.
it has not acquired onepermanent wrinkle after all its ripples.
it is perennially young, and imay stand and see a swallow dip apparently to pick an insect from itssurface as of yore.
the engineer does notforget at night, or his nature does not, that he has beheld this visionof serenity and purity once at least during the day.
a walkthrough the woods thither was often my recreation.
it was worth thewhile, if only to feel the wind blow on your cheek freely, and see thewaves run, and remember the life of mariners.
it is by this time mere vegetable mould andundistinguishable pond shore, through which rushes and flags havepushed up.
i used to admire the ripple marks on the sandy bottom, atthe north end of this pond, made firm and hard to the feet of the waderby the pressure of the water, and the rushes which grew in indian file,in waving lines, corresponding to these marks, rank behind rank, as ifthe waves had planted them.
there also i have found, in considerablequantities, curious balls, composed apparently of fine grass or roots,of pipewort perhaps, from half an inch to four inches in diameter, andperfectly spherical.
these wash back and forth in shallow water on asandy bottom, and are sometimes cast on the shore.
they are eithersolid grass, or have a little sand in the middle.
moreover,the waves, i suspect, do not so much construct as wear down a materialwhich has already acquired consistency.
they preserve their form whendry for an indefinite period.
give methe poverty that enjoys true wealth.
this is my lake country.
in these as in other respects, however, it is alesser twin of walden.
they are so much alike that you would say theymust be connected under ground.
it has the same stony shore, and itswaters are of the same hue.
one who frequents itproposes to call it virid lake.
it was even supposedby some that the pond had sunk, and this was one of the primitiveforest that formerly stood there.
as near as he could remember, it stoodtwelve or fifteen rods from the shore, where the water was thirty orforty feet deep.
he had some of it in his shed then.
therewere marks of an axe and of woodpeckers on the butt.
his father, eighty years old, could not remember when it was notthere.
several pretty large logs may still be seen lying on the bottom,where, owing to the undulation of the surface, they look like hugewater snakes in motion.
this pond has rarely been profaned by a boat, for there is little in itto tempt a fisherman.
white pond and walden are great crystals on the surface of the earth,lakes of light.
nature has no human inhabitant who appreciates her.
these were the shrines i visited both summer and winter.
it was a lake of rainbow light, in which, for a short while, i livedlike a dolphin.
if it had lasted longer it might have tinged myemployments and life.
as i walked on the railroad causeway, i used towonder at the halo of light around my shadow, and would fain fancymyself one of the elect.
one who visited me declared that the shadowsof some irishmen before him had no halo about them, that it was onlynatives that were so distinguished.
benvenuto cellini tells us in hismemoirs, that, after a certain terrible dream or vision which he hadduring his confinement in the castle of st.
angelo, a resplendent lightappeared over the shadow of his head at morning and evening, whether hewas in italy or france, and it was particularly conspicuous when thegrass was moist with dew.
this was probably the same phenomenon towhich i have referred, which is especially observed in the morning, butalso at other times, and even by moonlight.
beside, hetells us that he showed it to very few.
it wasone of those afternoons which seem indefinitely long before one, inwhich many events may happen, a large portion of our natural life,though it was already half spent when i started.
the gods must be proud, thought i, withsuch forked flashes to rout a poor unarmed fisherman.
there wesat together under that part of the roof which leaked the least, whileit showered and thundered without.
i had sat there many times of oldbefore the ship was built that floated his family to america.
thechickens, which had also taken shelter here from the rain, stalkedabout the room like members of the family, too humanized methought toroast well.
they stood and looked in my eye or pecked at my shoesignificantly.
but the onlytrue america is that country where you are at liberty to pursue such amode of life as may enable you to do without these, and where the statedoes not endeavor to compel you to sustain the slavery and war andother superfluous expenses which directly or indirectly result from theuse of such things.
for i purposely talked to him as if he were aphilosopher, or desired to be one.
a man will not need to studyhistory to find out what is best for his own culture.
i am not squeamish in such cases when manners areconcerned.
remember thy creator in the days of thy youth.
rise freefrom care before the dawn, and seek adventures.
let the noon find theeby other lakes, and the night overtake thee everywhere at home.
thereare no larger fields than these, no worthier games than may here beplayed.
grow wild according to thy nature, like these sedges andbrakes, which will never become english hay.
take shelter under the cloud, while they flee to carts and sheds.
let not to get a living be thy trade, but thy sport.
enjoy the land,but own it not.
through want of enterprise and faith men are where theyare, buying and selling, and spending their lives like serfs.
we should come home from far, fromadventures, and perils, and discoveries every day, with new experienceand character.
it is good bait sometimes, i allow.
the wildest scenes had become unaccountablyfamiliar.
i found in myself, and still find, an instinct toward ahigher, or, as it is named, spiritual life, as do most men, and anothertoward a primitive rank and savage one, and i reverence them both.
ilove the wild not less than the good.
the wildness and adventure thatare in fishing still recommended it to me.
i like sometimes to takerank hold on life and spend my day more as the animals do.
perhaps ihave owed to this employment and to hunting, when quite young, myclosest acquaintance with nature.
they early introduce us to and detainus in scenery with which otherwise, at that age, we should have littleacquaintance.
fishermen, hunters, woodchoppers, and others, spendingtheir lives in the fields and woods, in a peculiar sense a part ofnature themselves, are often in a more favorable mood for observingher, in the intervals of their pursuits, than philosophers or poetseven, who approach her with expectation.
she is not afraid to exhibitherself to them.
the traveller on the prairie is naturally a hunter, onthe head waters of the missouri and columbia a trapper, and at thefalls of st.
mary a fisherman.
they mistake who assert that the yankee has few amusements, because hehas not so many public holidays, and men and boys do not play so manygames as they do in england, for here the more primitive but solitaryamusements of hunting fishing and the like have not yet given place tothe former.
no wonder, then, that he did not oftener stay to play on thecommon.
but already a change is taking place, owing, not to anincreased humanity, but to an increased scarcity of game, for perhapsthe hunter is the greatest friend of the animals hunted, not exceptingthe humane society.
moreover, when at the pond, i wished sometimes to add fish to my farefor variety.
i have actually fished from the same kind of necessitythat the first fishers did.
whatever humanity i might conjure upagainst it was all factitious, and concerned my philosophy more than myfeelings.
i speak of fishing only now, for i had long felt differentlyabout fowling, and sold my gun before i went to the woods.
not that iam less humane than others, but i did not perceive that my feelingswere much affected.
i did not pity the fishes nor the worms.
as for fowling, during the last years that i carried a gun myexcuse was that i was studying ornithology, and sought only new or rarebirds.
but i confess that i am now inclined to think that there is afiner way of studying ornithology than this.
it requires so much closerattention to the habits of the birds, that, if for that reason only, ihave been willing to omit the gun.
this was myanswer with respect to those youths who were bent on this pursuit,trusting that they would soon outgrow it.
no humane being, past thethoughtless age of boyhood, will wantonly murder any creature whichholds its life by the same tenure that he does.
the hare in itsextremity cries like a child.
the mass of men are still andalways young in this respect.
in some countries a hunting parson is nouncommon sight.
commonly they didnot think that they were lucky, or well paid for their time, unlessthey got a long string of fish, though they had the opportunity ofseeing the pond all the while.
yet even they expect to go to heaven at last.
thus,even in civilized communities, the embryo man passes through the hunterstage of development.
i have tried it again and again.
ihave skill at it, and, like many of my fellows, a certain instinct forit, which revives from time to time, but always when i have done i feelthat it would have been better if i had not fished.
i think that i donot mistake.
it is a faint intimation, yet so are the first streaks ofmorning.
but i see that if i were to live in a wilderness ishould again be tempted to become a fisher and hunter in earnest.
beside, there is something essentially unclean about this diet and allflesh, and i began to see where housework commences, and whence theendeavor, which costs so much, to wear a tidy and respectableappearance each day, to keep the house sweet and free from all illodors and sights.
having been my own butcher and scullion and cook, aswell as the gentleman for whom the dishes were served up, i can speakfrom an unusually complete experience.
it was insignificant and unnecessary, and costmore than it came to.
a little bread or a few potatoes would have doneas well, with less trouble and filth.
the repugnance toanimal food is not the effect of experience, but is an instinct.
ibelieve that every man who has ever been earnest to preserve his higheror poetic faculties in the best condition has been particularlyinclined to abstain from animal food, and from much food of any kind.
the abdomen under the wings of the butterfly still representsthe larva.
yet perhaps thismay be done.
the fruits eaten temperately need not make us ashamed ofour appetites, nor interrupt the worthiest pursuits.
but put an extracondiment into your dish, and it will poison you.
it is not worth thewhile to live by rich cookery.
most men would feel shame if caughtpreparing with their own hands precisely such a dinner, whether ofanimal or vegetable food, as is every day prepared for them by others.
yet till this is otherwise we are not civilized, and, if gentlemen andladies, are not true men and women.
this certainly suggests what changeis to be made.
it may be vain to ask why the imagination will not bereconciled to flesh and fat.
i am satisfied that it is not.
whatever my own practice may be, i have no doubtthat it is a part of the destiny of the human race, in its gradualimprovement, to leave off eating animals, as surely as the savagetribes have left off eating each other when they came in contact withthe more civilized.
the faintest assured objection which onehealthy man feels will at length prevail over the arguments and customsof mankind.
no man ever followed his genius till it misled him.
thoughthe result were bodily weakness, yet perhaps no one can say that theconsequences were to be regretted, for these were a life in conformityto higher principles.
all nature is your congratulation, and you have causemomentarily to bless yourself.
the greatest gains and values arefarthest from being appreciated.
we easily come to doubt if they exist.
we soon forget them.
they are the highest reality.
perhaps the factsmost astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man.
thetrue harvest of my daily life is somewhat as intangible andindescribable as the tints of morning or evening.
such apparently slight causesdestroyed greece and rome, and will destroy england and america.
but to tell the truth, i find myself at present somewhat lessparticular in these respects.
perhaps these questions areentertained only in youth, as most believe of poetry.
not that food which entereth into the mouthdefileth a man, but the appetite with which it is eaten.
the wonder is how they, how youand i, can live this slimy, beastly life, eating and drinking.
our whole life is startlingly moral.
goodness is the only investment that neverfails.
in the music of the harp which trembles round the world it isthe insisting on this which thrills us.
though theyouth at last grows indifferent, the laws of the universe are notindifferent, but are forever on the side of the most sensitive.
listento every zephyr for some reproof, for it is surely there, and he isunfortunate who does not hear it.
we cannot touch a string or move astop but the charming moral transfixes us.
many an irksome noise, go along way off, is heard as music, a proud sweet satire on the meannessof our lives.
we are conscious of an animal in us, which awakens in proportion as ourhigher nature slumbers.
possibly we may withdraw from it, but never changeits nature.
the other day i picked up the lower jawof a hog, with white and sound teeth and tusks, which suggested thatthere was an animal health and vigor distinct from the spiritual.
thiscreature succeeded by other means than temperance and purity.
the generative energy, which, whenwe are loose, dissipates and makes us unclean, when we are continentinvigorates and inspires us.
man flows at once to god when the channel ofpurity is open.
by turns our purity inspires and our impurity casts usdown.
he is blessed who is assured that the animal is dying out in himday by day, and the divine being established.
perhaps there is none buthas cause for shame on account of the inferior and brutish nature towhich he is allied.
i fear that we are such gods or demigods only asfauns and satyrs, the divine allied to beasts, the creatures ofappetite, and that, to some extent, our very life is our disgrace.
it is the same whether a man eat, or drink, or cohabit, or sleepsensually.
they are but one appetite, and we only need to see a persondo any one of these things to know how great a sensualist he is.
theimpure can neither stand nor sit with purity.
when the reptile isattacked at one mouth of his burrow, he shows himself at another.
ifyou would be chaste, you must be temperate.
we have heard of thisvirtue, but we know not what it is.
we speak conformably to the rumorwhich we have heard.
in the student sensuality is a sluggish habitof mind.
an unclean person is universally a slothful one, one who sitsby a stove, whom the sun shines on prostrate, who reposes without beingfatigued.
if you would avoid uncleanness, and all the sins, workearnestly, though it be at cleaning a stable.
nature is hard to beovercome, but she must be overcome.
we discourse freely without shame of oneform of sensuality, and are silent about another.
we are so degradedthat we cannot speak simply of the necessary functions of human nature.
in earlier ages, in some countries, every function was reverentlyspoken of and regulated by law.
nothing was too trivial for the hindoolawgiver, however offensive it may be to modern taste.
he teaches howto eat, drink, cohabit, void excrement and urine, and the like,elevating what is mean, and does not falsely excuse himself by callingthese things trifles.
every man is the builder of a temple, called his body, to the god heworships, after a style purely his own, nor can he get off by hammeringmarble instead.
we are all sculptors and painters, and our material isour own flesh and blood and bones.
it was a rather coolevening, and some of his neighbors were apprehending a frost.
he hadnot attended to the train of his thoughts long when he heard some oneplaying on a flute, and that sound harmonized with his mood.
itwas no more than the scurf of his skin, which was constantly shuffledoff.
but the notes of the flute came home to his ears out of adifferent sphere from that he worked in, and suggested work for certainfaculties which slumbered in him.
they gently did away with the street,and the village, and the state in which he lived.
brute neighborssometimes i had a companion in my fishing, who came through the villageto my house from the other side of the town, and the catching of thedinner was as much a social exercise as the eating of it.
i wonder howmuch they have reaped.
i have waterfrom the spring, and a loaf of brown bread on the shelf.
it is the only trade i have learned.
my brown bread will soon be gone.
i will gowith you gladly soon, but i am just concluding a serious meditation.
ithink that i am near the end of it.
leave me alone, then, for a while.
but that we may not be delayed, you shall be digging the baitmeanwhile.
i think thati may warrant you one worm to every three sods you turn up, if you lookwell in among the roots of the grass, as if you were weeding.
or, ifyou choose to go farther, it will not be unwise, for i have found theincrease of fair bait to be very nearly as the squares of thedistances.
i fear mythoughts will not come back to me.
if it would do any good, i wouldwhistle for them.
i know not whether it was the dumps or abudding ecstasy.
there never is but one opportunity of a kind.
have put animals to their best use, for they are all beasts of burden,in a sense, made to carry some portion of our thoughts.
the mice which haunted my house were not the common ones, which aresaid to have been introduced into the country, but a wild native kindnot found in the village.
i sent one to a distinguished naturalist, andit interested him much.
when i was building, one of these had its nestunderneath the house, and before i had laid the second floor, and sweptout the shavings, would come out regularly at lunch time and pick upthe crumbs at my feet.
it could readily ascend the sides of the room by shortimpulses, like a squirrel, which it resembled in its motions.
the young suddenly disperse on your approach, at a signal fromthe mother, as if a whirlwind had swept them away, and they so exactlyresemble the dried leaves and twigs that many a traveler has placed hisfoot in the midst of a brood, and heard the whir of the old bird as sheflew off, and her anxious calls and mewing, or seen her trail her wingsto attract his attention, without suspecting their neighborhood.
theparent will sometimes roll and spin round before you in such adishabille, that you cannot, for a few moments, detect what kind ofcreature it is.
you may even tread on them, or have your eyes on them for aminute, without discovering them.
i have held them in my open hand atsuch a time, and still their only care, obedient to their mother andtheir instinct, was to squat there without fear or trembling.
soperfect is this instinct, that once, when i had laid them on the leavesagain, and one accidentally fell on its side, it was found with therest in exactly the same position ten minutes afterward.
they are notcallow like the young of most birds, but more perfectly developed andprecocious even than chickens.
the remarkably adult yet innocentexpression of their open and serene eyes is very memorable.
allintelligence seems reflected in them.
they suggest not merely thepurity of infancy, but a wisdom clarified by experience.
such an eyewas not born when the bird was, but is coeval with the sky it reflects.
the woods do not yield another such a gem.
the traveller does not oftenlook into such a limpid well.
the ignorant or reckless sportsman oftenshoots the parent at such a time, and leaves these innocents to fall aprey to some prowling beast or bird, or gradually mingle with thedecaying leaves which they so much resemble.
these were my hens and chickens.
it is remarkable how many creatures live wild and free though secret inthe woods, and still sustain themselves in the neighborhood of towns,suspected by hunters only.
i formerly saw the raccoon inthe woods behind where my house is built, and probably still heardtheir whinnering at night.
i had dug out the spring and made a wellof clear gray water, where i could dip up a pailful without roiling it,and thither i went for this purpose almost every day in midsummer, whenthe pond was warmest.
or i heard the peep of the young when i could not see theparent bird.
you only need sit still long enough in someattractive spot in the woods that all its inhabitants may exhibitthemselves to you by turns.
i was witness to events of a less peaceful character.
having once gothold they never let go, but struggled and wrestled and rolled on thechips incessantly.
on every side they were engaged in deadlycombat, yet without any noise that i could hear, and human soldiersnever fought so resolutely.
neither manifested the leastdisposition to retreat.
or perchance hewas some achilles, who had nourished his wrath apart, and had now cometo avenge or rescue his patroclus.
i should nothave wondered by this time to find that they had their respectivemusical bands stationed on some eminent chip, and playing theirnational airs the while, to excite the slow and cheer the dyingcombatants.
i was myself excited somewhat even as if they had been men.
the more you think of it, the less the difference.
for numbers and for carnage it was an austerlitz ordresden.
therewas not one hireling there.
kirby and spence tell us that the battles of ants have long beencelebrated and the date of them recorded, though they say that huber isthe only modern author who appears to have witnessed them.
this event happened previous to the expulsion of the tyrant christiernthe second from sweden.
once i wassurprised to see a cat walking along the stony shore of the pond, forthey rarely wander so far from home.
the surprise was mutual.
nevertheless the most domestic cat, which has lain on a rug all herdays, appears quite at home in the woods, and, by her sly and stealthybehavior, proves herself more native there than the regularinhabitants.
once, when berrying, i met with a cat with young kittensin the woods, quite wild, and they all, like their mother, had theirbacks up and were fiercely spitting at me.
there is no appearance of a membrane about them.
they comerustling through the woods like autumn leaves, at least ten men to oneloon.
but they were too oftensuccessful.
when i went to get a pail of water early in the morning ifrequently saw this stately bird sailing out of my cove within a fewrods.
but iwas more than a match for him on the surface.
he commonly went off in arain.
as i was paddling along the north shore one very calm octoberafternoon, for such days especially they settle on to the lakes, likethe milkweed down, having looked in vain over the pond for a loon,suddenly one, sailing out from the shore toward the middle a few rodsin front of me, set up his wild laugh and betrayed himself.
i pursuedwith a paddle and he dived, but when he came up i was nearer thanbefore.
each time, whenhe came to the surface, turning his head this way and that, he coolysurveyed the water and the land, and apparently chose his course sothat he might come up where there was the widest expanse of water andat the greatest distance from the boat.
it was surprising how quicklyhe made up his mind and put his resolve into execution.
he led me atonce to the widest part of the pond, and could not be driven from it.
while he was thinking one thing in his brain, i was endeavoring todivine his thought in mine.
it was a pretty game, played on the smoothsurface of the pond, a man against a loon.
sometimes he would come upunexpectedly on the opposite side of me, having apparently passeddirectly under the boat.
once or twice i saw a ripplewhere he approached the surface, just put his head out to reconnoitre,and instantly dived again.
i could commonly hear the splash of the water when he came up,and so also detected him.
but after an hour he seemed as fresh as ever,dived as willingly and swam yet farther than at first.
it wassurprising to see how serenely he sailed off with unruffled breast whenhe came to the surface, doing all the work with his webbed feetbeneath.
i concluded that he laughed inderision of my efforts, confident of his own resources.
though the skywas by this time overcast, the pond was so smooth that i could seewhere he broke the surface when i did not hear him.
his white breast,the stillness of the air, and the smoothness of the water were allagainst him.
so butchersrake the tongues of bison out of the prairie grass, regardless of thetorn and drooping plant.
whenchestnuts were ripe i laid up half a bushel for winter.
occasionally i climbed and shook the trees.
i relinquished these trees to them andvisited the more distant woods composed wholly of chestnut.
these nuts,as far as they went, were a good substitute for bread.
many othersubstitutes might, perhaps, be found.
i had often since seen its crimpled red velvety blossomsupported by the stems of other plants without knowing it to be thesame.
cultivation has well nigh exterminated it.
it has a sweetishtaste, much like that of a frostbitten potato, and i found it betterboiled than roasted.
this tuber seemed like a faint promise of natureto rear her own children and feed them simply here at some futureperiod.
already, by the first of september, i had seen two or three smallmaples turned scarlet across the pond, beneath where the white stems ofthree aspens diverged, at the point of a promontory, next the water.
each morning the manager of this gallerysubstituted some new picture, distinguished by more brilliant orharmonious coloring, for the old upon the walls.
i thuswarmed myself by the still glowing embers which the summer, like adeparted hunter, had left.
when i came to build my chimney i studied masonry.
such sayings themselves grow harder andadhere more firmly with age, and it would take many blows with a trowelto clean an old wiseacre of them.
however that may be, i was struck by the peculiartoughness of the steel which bore so many violent blows without beingworn out.
i lingered most about the fireplace, as the most vital part ofthe house.
i took a poetto board for a fortnight about those times, which caused me to be putto it for room.
he brought his own knife, though i had two, and we usedto scour them by thrusting them into the earth.
he shared with me thelabors of cooking.
i was pleased to see my work rising so square andsolid by degrees, and reflected, that, if it proceeded slowly, it wascalculated to endure a long time.
this wastoward the end of summer.
it was now november.
the north wind had already begun to cool the pond, though it took manyweeks of steady blowing to accomplish it, it is so deep.
when i beganto have a fire at evening, before i plastered my house, the chimneycarried smoke particularly well, because of the numerous chinks betweenthe boards.
yet i passed some cheerful evenings in that cool and airyapartment, surrounded by the rough brown boards full of knots, andrafters with the bark on high overhead.
my house never pleased my eyeso much after it was plastered, though i was obliged to confess that itwas more comfortable.
i now first began to inhabit my house, imay say, when i began to use it for warmth as well as shelter.
there is as much secrecyabout the cooking as if he had a design to poison you.
the dinner even is only the parable of a dinner, commonly.
asif only the savage dwelt near enough to nature and truth to borrow atrope from them.
i did not plaster till it was freezing weather.
i brought over somewhiter and cleaner sand for this purpose from the opposite shore of thepond in a boat, a sort of conveyance which would have tempted me to gomuch farther if necessary.
my house had in the mean while been shingleddown to the ground on every side.
in lathing i was pleased to be ableto send home each nail with a single blow of the hammer, and it was myambition to transfer the plaster from the board to the wall neatly andrapidly.
i remembered the story of a conceited fellow, who, in fineclothes, was wont to lounge about the village once, giving advice toworkmen.
iadmired anew the economy and convenience of plastering, which soeffectually shuts out the cold and takes a handsome finish, and ilearned the various casualties to which the plasterer is liable.
i wassurprised to see how thirsty the bricks were which drank up all themoisture in my plaster before i had smoothed it, and how many pailfulsof water it takes to christen a new hearth.
i might have got goodlimestone within a mile or two and burned it myself, if i had cared todo so.
the pond had in the mean while skimmed over in the shadiest andshallowest coves, some days or even weeks before the general freezing.
perhaps these have creased it, for you findsome of their cases in the furrows, though they are deep and broad forthem to make.
but the ice itself is the object of most interest, thoughyou must improve the earliest opportunity to study it.
these bubbles are from an eightieth to aneighth of an inch in diameter, very clear and beautiful, and you seeyour face reflected in them through the ice.
there may be thirty orforty of them to a square inch.
but these within the ice are not so numerous nor obvious asthose beneath.
i sometimes used to cast on stones to try the strengthof the ice, and those which broke through carried in air with them,which formed very large and conspicuous white bubbles beneath.
the beauty of the ice was gone, and itwas too late to study the bottom.
being curious to know what positionmy great bubbles occupied with regard to the new ice, i broke out acake containing a middling sized one, and turned it bottom upward.
thenew ice had formed around and under the bubble, so that it was includedbetween the two ices.
i inferred that theinfinite number of minute bubbles which i had first seen against theunder surface of the ice were now frozen in likewise, and that each, inits degree, had operated like a burning glass on the ice beneath tomelt and rot it.
at length the winter set in in good earnest, just as i had finishedplastering, and the wind began to howl around the house as if it hadnot had permission to do so till then.
night after night the geese camelumbering in in the dark with a clangor and a whistling of wings, evenafter the ground was covered with snow, some to alight in walden, andsome flying low over the woods toward fair haven, bound for mexico.
i withdrew yet farther into myshell, and endeavored to keep a bright fire both within my house andwithin my breast.
my employment out of doors now was to collect thedead wood in the forest, bringing it in my hands or on my shoulders, orsometimes trailing a dead pine tree under each arm to my shed.
an oldforest fence which had seen its best days was a great haul for me.
isacrificed it to vulcan, for it was past serving the god terminus.
there are enough fagots andwaste wood of all kinds in the forests of most of our towns to supportmany fires, but which at present warm none, and, some think, hinder thegrowth of the young wood.
this i hauled up partly on the shore.
after soaking two yearsand then lying high six months it was perfectly sound, thoughwaterlogged past drying.
it is remarkable what a value is still put upon wood even in this ageand in this new country, a value more permanent and universal than thatof gold.
after all our discoveries and inventions no man will go by apile of wood.
it is as precious to us as it was to our saxon and normanancestors.
mechanics and tradesmen who come in person to the forest on noother errand, are sure to attend the wood auction, and even pay a highprice for the privilege of gleaning after the woodchopper.
neither could i do withoutthem.
i love tohave mine before my window, and the more chips the better to remind meof my pleasing work.
as my driverprophesied when i was ploughing, they warmed me twice, once while i wassplitting them, and again when they were on the fire, so that no fuelcould give out more heat.
if it was dull, itwas at least hung true.
a few pieces of fat pine were a great treasure.
it is interesting toremember how much of this food for fire is still concealed in thebowels of the earth.
they are almost indestructible.
stumpsthirty or forty years old, at least, will still be sound at the core,though the sapwood has all become vegetable mould, as appears by thescales of the thick bark forming a ring level with the earth four orfive inches distant from the heart.
with axe and shovel you explorethis mine, and follow the marrowy store, yellow as beef tallow, or asif you had struck on a vein of gold, deep into the earth.
but commonlyi kindled my fire with the dry leaves of the forest, which i had storedup in my shed before the snow came.
once in awhile i got a little of this.
when the villagers were lighting theirfires beyond the horizon, i too gave notice to the various wildinhabitants of walden vale, by a smoky streamer from my chimney, that iwas awake.
hard green wood just cut, though i used but little of that, answered mypurpose better than any other.
my house wasnot empty though i was gone.
it was as if i had left a cheerfulhousekeeper behind.
but my house occupied so sunny and sheltereda position, and its roof was so low, that i could afford to let thefire go out in the middle of almost any winter day.
some of my friends spoke as if i was coming to the woodson purpose to freeze myself.
thus he goes a step or two beyondinstinct, and saves a little time for the fine arts.
though, when i hadbeen exposed to the rudest blasts a long time, my whole body began togrow torpid, when i reached the genial atmosphere of my house i soonrecovered my faculties and prolonged my life.
but the most luxuriouslyhoused has little to boast of in this respect, nor need we troubleourselves to speculate how the human race may be at last destroyed.
itwould be easy to cut their threads any time with a little sharper blastfrom the north.
cooking was then, for the most part, no longer a poetic,but merely a chemic process.
it will soon be forgotten, in these daysof stoves, that we used to roast potatoes in the ashes, after theindian fashion.
the stove not only took up room and scented the house,but it concealed the fire, and i felt as if i had lost a companion.
youcan always see a face in the fire.
the laborer, looking into it atevening, purifies his thoughts of the dross and earthiness which theyhave accumulated during the day.
but i could no longer sit and lookinto the fire, and the pertinent words of a poet recurred to me withnew force.
for many weeks i met no one inmy walks but those who came occasionally to cut wood and sled it to thevillage.
the elements, however, abetted me in making a path through thedeepest snow in the woods, for when i had once gone through the windblew the oak leaves into my tracks, where they lodged, and by absorbingthe rays of the sun melted the snow, and so not only made a dry bed formy feet, but in the night their dark line was my guide.
for humansociety i was obliged to conjure up the former occupants of thesewoods.
within the memory of many of my townsmen the road near which myhouse stands resounded with the laugh and gossip of inhabitants, andthe woods which border it were notched and dotted here and there withtheir little gardens and dwellings, though it was then much more shutin by the forest than now.
in some places, within my own remembrance,the pines would scrape both sides of a chaise at once, and women andchildren who were compelled to go this way to lincoln alone and on footdid it with fear, and often ran a good part of the distance.
some say that he was a guinea negro.
he too, however, occupies anequally narrow house at present.
here, by the very corner of my field, still nearer to town, zilpha, acolored woman, had her little house, where she spun linen for thetownsfolk, making the walden woods ring with her shrill singing, forshe had a loud and notable voice.
she led a hard life, and somewhat inhumane.
here then men saluted one another, and heard and told thenews, and went their ways again.
it was about the size of mine.
it was set on fire bymischievous boys, one election night, if i do not mistake.
it fairly overcame mynervii.
i had just sunk my head on this when the bells rung fire, andin hot haste the engines rolled that way, led by a straggling troop ofmen and boys, and i among the foremost, for i had leaped the brook.
the very nearness of the firebut cooled our ardor.
he had been working far off in the rivermeadows all day, and had improved the first moments that he could callhis own to visit the home of his fathers and his youth.
he gazed intothe cellar from all sides and points of view by turns, always lyingdown to it, as if there was some treasure, which he remembered,concealed between the stones, where there was absolutely nothing but aheap of bricks and ashes.
the house being gone, he looked at what therewas left.
once more, on the left, where are seen the well and lilac bushes by thewall, in the now open field, lived nutting and le grosse.
but to returntoward lincoln.
farther in the woods than any of these, where the road approachesnearest to the pond, wyman the potter squatted, and furnished histownsmen with earthen ware, and left descendants to succeed him.
one day in midsummer, when i was hoeing, a man who was carrying a loadof pottery to market stopped his horse against my field and inquiredconcerning wyman the younger.
quoil, he was called.
rumor said that he had been asoldier at waterloo.
if he had lived i should have made him fight hisbattles over again.
his trade here was that of a ditcher.
napoleon wentto st.
all i know of him is tragic.
he was a man of manners, like one who had seen the world, and wascapable of more civil speech than you could well attend to.
there layhis old clothes curled up by use, as if they were himself, upon hisraised plank bed.
his pipe lay broken on the hearth, instead of a bowlbroken at the fountain.
one blackchicken which the administrator could not catch, black as night and assilent, not even croaking, awaiting reynard, still went to roost in thenext apartment.
in the rear there was the dim outline of a garden,which had been planted but had never received its first hoeing, owingto those terrible shaking fits, though it was now harvest time.
i mark its still tender, civil, cheerful, lilac colors.
they wereuniversally a thirsty race.
i am not aware that any man has ever built on the spot which i occupy.
deliver me from a city built on the site of a more ancient city, whosematerials are ruins, whose gardens cemeteries.
the soil is blanched andaccursed there, and before that becomes necessary the earth itself willbe destroyed.
with such reminiscences i repeopled the woods and lulledmyself asleep.
at this season i seldom had a visitor.
in the deepest snows, the path which i used from the highway to myhouse, about half a mile long, might have been represented by ameandering dotted line, with wide intervals between the dots.
he could hear me when i moved and cronched the snow withmy feet, but could not plainly see me.
i too felt aslumberous influence after watching him half an hour, as he sat thuswith his eyes half open, like a cat, winged brother of the cat.
thus, guided amid the pine boughs rather by a delicate sense of theirneighborhood than by sight, feeling his twilight way as it were withhis sensitive pinions, he found a new perch, where he might in peaceawait the dawning of his day.
for i came to town still,like a friendly indian, when the contents of the broad open fields wereall piled up between the walls of the walden road, and half an hoursufficed to obliterate the tracks of the last traveller.
sometimes, notwithstanding the snow, when i returned from my walk atevening i crossed the deep tracks of a woodchopper leading from mydoor, and found his pile of whittlings on the hearth, and my housefilled with the odor of his pipe.
the one who came from farthest to my lodge, through deepest snows andmost dismal tempests, was a poet.
we made that small house ring with boisterous mirth and resoundwith the murmur of much sober talk, making amends then to walden valefor the long silences.
broadway was still and deserted in comparison.
i should not forget that during my last winter at the pond there wasanother welcome visitor, who at one time came through the village,through snow and rain and darkness, till he saw my lamp through thetrees, and shared with me some long winter evenings.
these he peddlesstill, prompting god and disgracing man, bearing for fruit his brainonly, like the nut its kernel.
i think that he must be the man of themost faith of any alive.
his words and attitude always suppose a betterstate of things than other men are acquainted with, and he will be thelast man to be disappointed as the ages revolve.
he has no venture inthe present.
but though comparatively disregarded now, when his daycomes, laws unsuspected by most will take effect, and masters offamilies and rulers will come to him for advice.
with his hospitable intellect heembraces children, beggars, insane, and scholars, and entertains thethought of all, adding to it commonly some breadth and elegance.
enter ye thathave leisure and a quiet mind, who earnestly seek the right road.
whichever way we turned, itseemed that the heavens and the earth had met together, since heenhanced the beauty of the landscape.
having each some shingles of thought well dried, we sat and whittledthem, trying our knives, and admiring the clear yellowish grain of thepumpkin pine.
therewe worked, revising mythology, rounding a fable here and there, andbuilding castles in the air for which earth offered no worthyfoundation.
there too, as every where, i sometimes expected the visitor who nevercomes.
winter animalswhen the ponds were firmly frozen, they afforded not only new andshorter routes to many points, but new views from their surfaces of thefamiliar landscape around them.
i took this coursewhen i went to lecture in lincoln in the evening, travelling in no roadand passing no house between my own hut and the lecture room.
in goosepond, which lay in my way, a colony of muskrats dwelt, and raised theircabins high above the ice, though none could be seen abroad when icrossed it.
walden, being like the rest usually bare of snow, or withonly shallow and interrupted drifts on it, was my yard, where i couldwalk freely when the snow was nearly two feet deep on a level elsewhereand the villagers were confined to their streets.
they passed over the pondtoward fair haven, seemingly deterred from settling by my light, theircommodore honking all the while with a regular beat.
and yet, if you had a discriminating ear, therewere in it the elements of a concord such as these plains never saw norheard.
sometimes onecame near to my window, attracted by my light, barked a vulpine curseat me, and then retreated.
in the twilight and thenight the rabbits came regularly and made a hearty meal.
at length the jays arrive, whose discordant screams were heard longbefore, as they were warily making their approach an eighth of a mileoff, and in a stealthy and sneaking manner they flit from tree to tree,nearer and nearer, and pick up the kernels which the squirrels havedropped.
meanwhile also came the chickadees in flocks, which, picking up thecrumbs the squirrels had dropped, flew to the nearest twig, and,placing them under their claws, hammered away at them with their littlebills, as if it were an insect in the bark, till they were sufficientlyreduced for their slender throats.
they wereso familiar that at length one alighted on an armful of wood which iwas carrying in, and pecked at the sticks without fear.
i once had asparrow alight upon my shoulder for a moment while i was hoeing in avillage garden, and i felt that i was more distinguished by thatcircumstance than i should have been by any epaulet i could have worn.
the squirrels also grew at last to be quite familiar, and occasionallystepped upon my shoe, when that was the nearest way.
they will comeregularly every evening to particular trees, where the cunningsportsman lies in wait for them, and the distant orchards next thewoods suffer thus not a little.
i am glad that the partridge gets fed,at any rate.
in dark winter mornings, or in short winter afternoons, i sometimesheard a pack of hounds threading all the woods with hounding cry andyelp, unable to resist the instinct of the chase, and the note of thehunting horn at intervals, proving that man was in the rear.
and perhaps at eveningi see the hunters returning with a single brush trailing from theirsleigh for a trophy, seeking their inn.
sometimes, however, he will run upon awall many rods, and then leap off far to one side, and he appears toknow that water will not retain his scent.
a hunter told me that heonce saw a fox pursued by hounds burst out on to walden when the icewas covered with shallow puddles, run part way across, and then returnto the same shore.
ere long the hounds arrived, but here they lost thescent.
sometimes a pack hunting by themselves would pass my door, andcircle round my house, and yelp and hound without regarding me, as ifafflicted by a species of madness, so that nothing could divert themfrom the pursuit.
thus they circle until they fall upon the recenttrail of a fox, for a wise hound will forsake every thing else forthis.
one day a man came to my hut from lexington to inquire after hishound that made a large track, and had been hunting for a week byhimself.
some way behind came an old hound and her three pups in full pursuit,hunting on their own account, and disappeared again in the woods.
the hunter still kept his placeand listened to the hounds.
still on they came, and now the near woodsresounded through all their aisles with their demoniac cry.
then the hunter came forward and stood in their midst, andthe mystery was solved.
they waited in silence while he skinned thefox, then followed the brush a while, and at length turned off into thewoods again.
credit is given for deer skins also, and they were daily sold.
one man still preserves the horns of the last deer that was killed inthis vicinity, and another has told me the particulars of the hunt inwhich his uncle was engaged.
the hunters were formerly a numerous andmerry crew here.
at midnight, when there was a moon, i sometimes met with hounds in mypath prowling about the woods, which would skulk out of my way, as ifafraid, and stand silent amid the bushes till i had passed.
squirrels and wild mice disputed for my store of nuts.
they used to come round my door at dusk to nibble thepotato parings which i had thrown out, and were so nearly the color ofthe ground that they could hardly be distinguished when still.
sometimes in the twilight i alternately lost and recovered sight of onesitting motionless under my window.
when i opened my door in theevening, off they would go with a squeak and a bounce.
near at handthey only excited my pity.
it looked as if nature no longer contained the breedof nobler bloods, but stood on her last toes.
its large eyes appearedyoung and unhealthy, almost dropsical.
not without reason was its slenderness.
such then was itsnature.
it is hardly as ifyou had seen a wild creature when a rabbit or a partridge bursts away,only a natural one, as much to be expected as rustling leaves.
thepartridge and the rabbit are still sure to thrive, like true natives ofthe soil, whatever revolutions occur.
if the forest is cut off, thesprouts and bushes which spring up afford them concealment, and theybecome more numerous than ever.
that must be a poor country indeed thatdoes not support a hare.
i awoke to ananswered question, to nature and daylight.
she has long ago taken herresolution.
first i take an axe and pail and go in searchof water, if that be not a dream.
after a cold and snowy night itneeded a divining rod to find it.
every winter the liquid and tremblingsurface of the pond, which was so sensitive to every breath, andreflected every light and shadow, becomes solid to the depth of a footor a foot and a half, so that it will support the heaviest teams, andperchance the snow covers it to an equal depth, and it is not to bedistinguished from any level field.
heaven is under our feet as well as over our heads.
they neverconsulted with books, and know and can tell much less than they havedone.
the things which they practise are said not yet to be known.
hereis one fishing for pickerel with grown perch for bait.
you look intohis pail with wonder as into a summer pond, as if he kept summer lockedup at home, or knew where she had retreated.
he gets his living bybarking trees.
such a man has some right to fish, and i love to seenature carried out in him.
when i strolled around the pond in misty weather i was sometimes amusedby the primitive mode which some ruder fisherman had adopted.
he wouldperhaps have placed alder branches over the narrow holes in the ice,which were four or five rods apart and an equal distance from theshore, and having fastened the end of the line to a stick to preventits being pulled through, have passed the slack line over a twig of thealder, a foot or more above the ice, and tied a dry oak leaf to it,which, being pulled down, would show when he had a bite.
these aldersloomed through the mist at regular intervals as you walked half wayround the pond.
they possess a quite dazzlingand transcendent beauty which separates them by a wide interval fromthe cadaverous cod and haddock whose fame is trumpeted in our streets.
easily, witha few convulsive quirks, they give up their watery ghosts, like amortal translated before his time to the thin air of heaven.
there have been many stories toldabout the bottom, or rather no bottom, of this pond, which certainlyhad no foundation for themselves.
it is remarkable how long men willbelieve in the bottomlessness of a pond without taking the trouble tosound it.
i have visited two such bottomless ponds in one walk in thisneighborhood.
many have believed that walden reached quite through tothe other side of the globe.
but i can assure my readersthat walden has a reasonably tight bottom at a not unreasonable, thoughat an unusual, depth.
while men believe in the infinite some ponds will be thought tobe bottomless.
a factory owner, hearing what depth i had found, thought that it couldnot be true, for, judging from his acquaintance with dams, sand wouldnot lie at so steep an angle.
but the deepest ponds are not so deep inproportion to their area as most suppose, and, if drained, would notleave very remarkable valleys.
most ponds, emptied, would leave a meadow no more hollow than wefrequently see.
often an inquisitive eye may detect the shores of a primitive lake inthe low horizon hills, and no subsequent elevation of the plain hasbeen necessary to conceal their history.
but it is easiest, as they whowork on the highways know, to find the hollows by the puddles after ashower.
the amount of it is, the imagination give it the least license,dives deeper and soars higher than nature goes.
so, probably, the depthof the ocean will be found to be very inconsiderable compared with itsbreadth.
as i sounded through the ice i could determine the shape of the bottomwith greater accuracy than is possible in surveying harbors which donot freeze over, and i was surprised at its general regularity.
in thedeepest part there are several acres more level than almost any fieldwhich is exposed to the sun wind and plough.
some are accustomed to speak of deep and dangerous holeseven in quiet sandy ponds like this, but the effect of water underthese circumstances is to level all inequalities.
the regularity of thebottom and its conformity to the shores and the range of theneighboring hills were so perfect that a distant promontory betrayeditself in the soundings quite across the pond, and its direction couldbe determined by observing the opposite shore.
cape becomes bar, andplain shoal, and valley and gorge deep water and channel.
when i had mapped the pond by the scale of ten rods to an inch, and putdown the soundings, more than a hundred in all, i observed thisremarkable coincidence.
of five coves, three, or all which had been sounded, were observed tohave a bar quite across their mouths and deeper water within, so thatthe bay tended to be an expansion of water within the land not onlyhorizontally but vertically, and to form a basin or independent pond,the direction of the two capes showing the course of the bar.
inproportion as the mouth of the cove was wider compared with its length,the water over the bar was deeper compared with that in the basin.
given, then, the length and breadth of the cove, and the character ofthe surrounding shore, and you have almost elements enough to make outa formula for all cases.
the deepest part was found to bewithin one hundred feet of this, still farther in the direction towhich i had inclined, and was only one foot deeper, namely, sixty feet.
of course, a stream running through, or an island in the pond, wouldmake the problem much more complicated.
if we knew all the laws of nature, we should need only one fact, or thedescription of one actual phenomenon, to infer all the particularresults at that point.
now we know only a few laws, and our result isvitiated, not, of course, by any confusion or irregularity in nature,but by our ignorance of essential elements in the calculation.
the particular laws are asour points of view, as, to the traveller, a mountain outline varieswith every step, and it has an infinite number of profiles, thoughabsolutely but one form.
even when cleft or bored through it is notcomprehended in its entireness.
what i have observed of the pond is no less true in ethics.
it is thelaw of average.
perhaps weneed only to know how his shores trend and his adjacent country orcircumstances, to infer his depth and concealed bottom.
if he issurrounded by mountainous circumstances, an achillean shore, whosepeaks overshadow and are reflected in his bosom, they suggest acorresponding depth in him.
but a low and smooth shore proves himshallow on that side.
in our bodies, a bold projecting brow falls offto and indicates a corresponding depth of thought.
these inclinations are not whimsical usually, but theirform, size, and direction are determined by the promontories of theshore, the ancient axes of elevation.
when this bar is graduallyincreased by storms, tides, or currents, or there is a subsidence ofthe waters, so that it reaches to the surface, that which was at firstbut an inclination in the shore in which a thought was harbored becomesan individual lake, cut off from the ocean, wherein the thought securesits own conditions, changes, perhaps, from salt to fresh, becomes asweet sea, dead sea, or a marsh.
as for the inlet or outlet of walden, i have not discovered any butrain and snow and evaporation, though perhaps, with a thermometer and aline, such places may be found, for where the water flows into the pondit will probably be coldest in summer and warmest in winter.
while i was surveying, the ice, which was sixteen inches thick,undulated under a slight wind like water.
it is well known that a levelcannot be used on ice.
at one rod from the shore its greatestfluctuation, when observed by means of a level on land directed towarda graduated staff on the ice, was three quarters of an inch, though theice appeared firmly attached to the shore.
it was probably greater inthe middle.
this was somewhat like cutting a hole in the bottom of a shipto let the water out.
it may be that he lays up notreasures in this world which will cool his summer drink in the next.
he cuts and saws the solid pond, unroofs the house of fishes, and cartsoff their very element and air, held fast by chains and stakes likecorded wood, through the favoring winter air, to wintry cellars, tounderlie the summer there.
it looks like solidified azure, as, far off,it is drawn through the streets.
i did not know whether they had come to sow acrop of winter rye, or some other kind of grain recently introducedfrom iceland.
as i saw no manure, i judged that they meant to skim theland, as i had done, thinking the soil was deep and had lain fallowlong enough.
to speak literally, a hundred irishmen, with yankee overseers, camefrom cambridge every day to get out the ice.
they divided it into cakesby methods too well known to require description, and these, beingsledded to the shore, were rapidly hauled off on to an ice platform,and raised by grappling irons and block and tackle, worked by horses,on to a stack, as surely as so many barrels of flour, and there placedevenly side by side, and row upon row, as if they formed the solid baseof an obelisk designed to pierce the clouds.
they told me that in agood day they could get out a thousand tons, which was the yield ofabout one acre.
thusthe pond recovered the greater part.
like the water, the walden ice, seen near at hand, has a green tint,but at a distance is beautifully blue, and you can easily tell it fromthe white ice of the river, or the merely greenish ice of some ponds, aquarter of a mile off.
i havenoticed that a portion of walden which in the state of water was greenwill often, when frozen, appear from the same point of view blue.
sothe hollows about this pond will, sometimes, in the winter, be filledwith a greenish water somewhat like its own, but the next day will havefrozen blue.
perhaps the blue color of water and ice is due to thelight and air they contain, and the most transparent is the bluest.
iceis an interesting subject for contemplation.
perhaps i shall hear a solitary loon laugh as he dives and plumeshimself, or shall see a lonely fisher in his boat, like a floatingleaf, beholding his form reflected in the waves, where lately a hundredmen securely labored.
thus it appears that the sweltering inhabitants of charleston and neworleans, of madras and bombay and calcutta, drink at my well.
i meet his servant come to draw water for his master, andour buckets as it were grate together in the same well.
the pure waldenwater is mingled with the sacred water of the ganges.
with favoringwinds it is wafted past the site of the fabulous islands of atlantisand the hesperides, makes the periplus of hanno, and, floating byternate and tidore and the mouth of the persian gulf, melts in thetropic gales of the indian seas, and is landed in ports of whichalexander only heard the names.
but such was not the effect onwalden that year, for she had soon got a thick new garment to take theplace of the old.
this pond never breaks up so soon as the others inthis neighborhood, on account both of its greater depth and its havingno stream passing through it to melt or wear away the ice.
it indicates better than any waterhereabouts the absolute progress of the season, being least affected bytransient changes of temperature.
this difference ofthree and a half degrees between the temperature of the deep water andthe shallow in the latter pond, and the fact that a great proportion ofit is comparatively shallow, show why it should break up so much soonerthan walden.
the ice in the shallowest part was at this time severalinches thinner than in the middle.
so, also, every one who haswaded about the shores of the pond in summer must have perceived howmuch warmer the water is close to the shore, where only three or fourinches deep, than a little distance out, and on the surface where it isdeep, than near the bottom.
in spring the sun not only exerts aninfluence through the increased temperature of the air and earth, butits heat passes through ice a foot or more thick, and is reflected fromthe bottom in shallow water, and so also warms the water and melts theunder side of the ice, at the same time that it is melting it moredirectly above, making it uneven, and causing the air bubbles which itcontains to extend themselves upward and downward until it iscompletely honeycombed, and at last disappears suddenly in a singlespring rain.
the phenomena of the year take place every day in a pond on a smallscale.
every morning, generally speaking, the shallow water is beingwarmed more rapidly than the deep, though it may not be made so warmafter all, and every evening it is being cooled more rapidly until themorning.
the day is an epitome of the year.
the night is the winter,the morning and evening are the spring and fall, and the noon is thesummer.
the cracking and booming of the ice indicate a change oftemperature.
ittook a short siesta at noon, and boomed once more toward night, as thesun was withdrawing his influence.
in the right stage of the weather apond fires its evening gun with great regularity.
but in the middle ofthe day, being full of cracks, and the air also being less elastic, ithad completely lost its resonance, and probably fishes and muskratscould not then have been stunned by a blow on it.
the largest pond is as sensitive to atmospheric changes as the globuleof mercury in its tube.
one attraction in coming to the woods to live was that i should haveleisure and opportunity to see the spring come in.
one year i went across the middle only five days beforeit disappeared entirely.
every incident connected with the breaking up of the rivers and pondsand the settling of the weather is particularly interesting to us wholive in a climate of so great extremes.
when the warmer days come, theywho dwell near the river hear the ice crack at night with a startlingwhoop as loud as artillery, as if its icy fetters were rent from end toend, and within a few days see it rapidly going out.
so the alligatorcomes out of the mud with quakings of the earth.
it was a warm day, and he wassurprised to see so great a body of ice remaining.
not seeing anyducks, he hid his boat on the north or back side of an island in thepond, and then concealed himself in the bushes on the south side, toawait them.
the ice was melted for three or four rods from the shore,and there was a smooth and warm sheet of water, with a muddy bottom,such as the ducks love, within, and he thought it likely that somewould be along pretty soon.
few phenomena gave me more delight than to observe the forms whichthawing sand and clay assume in flowing down the sides of a deep cut onthe railroad through which i passed on my way to the village, aphenomenon not very common on so large a scale, though the number offreshly exposed banks of the right material must have been greatlymultiplied since railroads were invented.
the material was sand ofevery degree of fineness and of various rich colors, commonly mixedwith a little clay.
when the frost comes out in the spring, and even ina thawing day in the winter, the sand begins to flow down the slopeslike lava, sometimes bursting out through the snow and overflowing itwhere no sand was to be seen before.
innumerable little streams overlapand interlace one with another, exhibiting a sort of hybrid product,which obeys half way the law of currents, and half way that ofvegetation.
the whole cut impressed me as if it were a cavewith its stalactites laid open to the light.
the various shades of thesand are singularly rich and agreeable, embracing the different ironcolors, brown, gray, yellowish, and reddish.
the whole bank, which is from twenty to forty feet high, is sometimesoverlaid with a mass of this kind of foliage, or sandy rupture, for aquarter of a mile on one or both sides, the produce of one spring day.
what makes this sand foliage remarkable is its springing into existencethus suddenly.
i feel as if i were nearer tothe vitals of the globe, for this sandy overflow is something such afoliaceous mass as the vitals of the animal body.
you find thus in thevery sands an anticipation of the vegetable leaf.
no wonder that theearth expresses itself outwardly in leaves, it so labors with the ideainwardly.
the atoms have already learned this law, and are pregnant byit.
the overhanging leaf sees here its prototype.
the feathers and wings of birds arestill drier and thinner leaves.
thus, also, you pass from the lumpishgrub in the earth to the airy and fluttering butterfly.
the very globecontinually transcends and translates itself, and becomes winged in itsorbit.
even ice begins with delicate crystal leaves, as if it hadflowed into moulds which the fronds of water plants have impressed onthe watery mirror.
the whole tree itself is but one leaf, and riversare still vaster leaves whose pulp is intervening earth, and towns andcities are the ova of insects in their axils.
when the sun withdraws the sand ceases to flow, but in the morning thestreams will start once more and branch and branch again into a myriadof others.
you here see perchance how blood vessels are formed.
itis wonderful how rapidly yet perfectly the sand organizes itself as itflows, using the best material its mass affords to form the sharp edgesof its channel.
such are the sources of rivers.
in the silicious matterwhich the water deposits is perhaps the bony system, and in the stillfiner soil and organic matter the fleshy fibre or cellular tissue.
the fingers and toes flow to their extent from thethawing mass of the body.
the nose is a manifest congealeddrop or stalactite.
the chin is a still larger drop, the confluentdripping of the face.
the cheeks are a slide from the brows into thevalley of the face, opposed and diffused by the cheek bones.
thus it seemed that this one hillside illustrated the principle of allthe operations of nature.
the maker of this earth but patented a leaf.
it precedes the green and flowery spring, asmythology precedes regular poetry.
i know of nothing more purgative ofwinter fumes and indigestions.
it convinces me that earth is still inher swaddling clothes, and stretches forth baby fingers on every side.
fresh curls spring from the baldest brow.
there is nothing inorganic.
and not only it,but the institutions upon it, are plastic like clay in the hands of thepotter.
ere long, not only on these banks, but on every hill and plain and inevery hollow, the frost comes out of the ground like a dormantquadruped from its burrow, and seeks the sea with music, or migrates toother climes in clouds.
thaw with his gentle persuasion is morepowerful than thor with his hammer.
the one melts, the other but breaksin pieces.
it is an antique style older than greek oregyptian.
many of the phenomena of winter are suggestive of aninexpressible tenderness and fragile delicacy.
they were wholly deaf to my arguments, orfailed to perceive their force, and fell into a strain of invectivethat was irresistible.
the sinking sound of melting snow is heard in all dells, andthe ice dissolves apace in the ponds.
it grows as steadily as the rill oozes out of theground.
it is almost identical with that, for in the growing days ofjune, when the rills are dry, the grass blades are their channels, andfrom year to year the herds drink at this perennial green stream, andthe mower draws from it betimes their winter supply.
so our human lifebut dies down to its root, and still puts forth its green blade toeternity.
walden is melting apace.
there is a canal two rods wide along thenortherly and westerly sides, and wider still at the east end.
a greatfield of ice has cracked off from the main body.
he too ishelping to crack it.
but the wind slideseastward over its opaque surface in vain, till it reaches the livingsurface beyond.
such is the contrast between winter and spring.
walden wasdead and is alive again.
but this spring it broke up more steadily, asi have said.
the change from storm and winter to serene and mild weather, from darkand sluggish hours to bright and elastic ones, is a memorable crisiswhich all things proclaim.
it is seemingly instantaneous at last.
suddenly an influx of light filled my house, though the evening was athand, and the clouds of winter still overhung it, and the eaves weredripping with sleety rain.
i knew that it would not rain any more.
so i came in, and shut the door, and passed my first springnight in the woods.
in the morning i watched the geese from the door through the mist,sailing in the middle of the pond, fifty rods off, so large andtumultuous that walden appeared like an artificial pond for theiramusement.
for a week i heard the circling, groping clangor of some solitary goosein the foggy mornings, seeking its companion, and still peopling thewoods with the sound of a larger life than they could sustain.
in aprilthe pigeons were seen again flying express in small flocks, and in duetime i heard the martins twittering over my clearing, though it had notseemed that the township contained so many that it could afford me any,and i fancied that they were peculiarly of the ancient race that dweltin hollow trees ere white men came.
in almost all climes the tortoiseand the frog are among the precursors and heralds of this season, andbirds fly with song and glancing plumage, and plants spring and bloom,and winds blow, to correct this slight oscillation of the poles andpreserve the equilibrium of nature.
as every season seems best to us in its turn, so the coming in ofspring is like the creation of cosmos out of chaos and the realizationof the golden age.
so ourprospects brighten on the influx of better thoughts.
we loiter in winter while it is already spring.
such a day is a truce tovice.
while such a sun holds out to burn, the vilest sinner may return.
through our own recovered innocence we discern the innocence of ourneighbors.
even he has entered into the joy of his lord.
in like mannerthe evil which one does in the interval of a day prevents the germs ofvirtues which began to spring up again from developing themselves anddestroys them.
as soon as the breath of evening does notsuffice longer to preserve them, then the nature of man does not differmuch from that of the brute.
men seeing the nature of this man likethat of the brute, think that he has never possessed the innate facultyof reason.
not yet the pine felled on its mountains had descended     to the liquid waves that it might see a foreign world,     and mortals knew no shores but their own.
thissight reminded me of falconry and what nobleness and poetry areassociated with that sport.
it was the most ethereal flight ihad ever witnessed.
it was not lonely, but made all theearth lonely beneath it.
beside this i got a rare mess of golden and silver and bright cupreousfishes, which looked like a string of jewels.
there needs no stronger proof of immortality.
allthings must live in such a light.
atthe same time that we are earnest to explore and learn all things, werequire that all things be mysterious and unexplorable, that land andsea be infinitely wild, unsurveyed and unfathomed by us becauseunfathomable.
we can never have enough of nature.
we need to witness our own limits transgressed,and some life pasturing freely where we never wander.
we are cheeredwhen we observe the vulture feeding on the carrion which disgusts anddisheartens us and deriving health and strength from the repast.
therewas a dead horse in the hollow by the path to my house, which compelledme sometimes to go out of my way, especially in the night when the airwas heavy, but the assurance it gave me of the strong appetite andinviolable health of nature was my compensation for this.
the impression made on a wise man is that of universal innocence.
poison is not poisonous after all, nor are any wounds fatal.
compassionis a very untenable ground.
it must be expeditious.
its pleadings willnot bear to be stereotyped.
conclusionto the sick the doctors wisely recommend a change of air and scenery.
thank heaven, here is not all the world.
even the bison, to some extent, keeps pace with the seasons,cropping the pastures of the colorado only till a greener and sweetergrass awaits him by the yellowstone.
the universeis wider than our views of it.
yet we should oftener look over the tafferel of our craft, like curiouspassengers, and not make the voyage like stupid sailors picking oakum.
the other side of the globe is but the home of our correspondent.
every man isthe lord of a realm beside which the earthly empire of the czar is buta petty state, a hummock left by the ice.
theylove the soil which makes their graves, but have no sympathy with thespirit which may still animate their clay.
patriotism is a maggot intheir heads.
i have more of god, they more of the road.
it is not worth the while to go round the world to count the cats inzanzibar.
if you wouldlearn to speak all tongues and conform to the customs of all nations,if you would travel farther than all travellers, be naturalized in allclimes, and cause the sphinx to dash her head against a stone, evenobey the precept of the old philosopher, and explore thyself.
hereinare demanded the eye and the nerve.
only the defeated and deserters goto the wars, cowards that run away and enlist.
it is not for a man to put himself in such an attitude tosociety, but to maintain himself in whatever attitude he find himselfthrough obedience to the laws of his being, which will never be one ofopposition to a just government, if he should chance to meet with such.
i left the woods for as good a reason as i went there.
perhaps itseemed to me that i had several more lives to live, and could not spareany more time for that one.
it is remarkable how easily and insensiblywe fall into a particular route, and make a beaten track for ourselves.
it is true, i fear that others may have falleninto it, and so helped to keep it open.
i do not wish to go below now.
in proportion as he simplifieshis life, the laws of the universe will appear less complex, andsolitude will not be solitude, nor poverty poverty, nor weaknessweakness.
now put the foundations under them.
it is a ridiculous demand which england and america make, that youshall speak so that they can understand you.
as if that were important, and there were notenough to understand you without them.
as if there weresafety in stupidity alone.
the volatile truth of our wordsshould continually betray the inadequacy of the residual statement.
southern customers objected to itsblue color, which is the evidence of its purity, as if it were muddy,and preferred the cambridge ice, which is white, but tastes of weeds.
the purity men love is like the mists which envelop the earth, and notlike the azure ether beyond.
some are dinning in our ears that we americans, and moderns generally,are intellectual dwarfs compared with the ancients, or even theelizabethan men.
let him step to themusic which he hears, however measured or far away.
one day it came into his mind to make a staff.
havingconsidered that in an imperfect work time is an ingredient, but into aperfect work time does not enter, he said to himself, it shall beperfect in all respects, though i should do nothing else in my life.
his singleness of purpose and resolution, and his elevatedpiety, endowed him, without his knowledge, with perennial youth.
as hemade no compromise with time, time kept out of his way, and only sighedat a distance because he could not overcome him.
before he had found astock in all respects suitable the city of kouroo was a hoary ruin, andhe sat on one of its mounds to peel the stick.
before he had given itthe proper shape the dynasty of the candahars was at an end, and withthe point of the stick he wrote the name of the last of that race inthe sand, and then resumed his work.
and now he saw by the heap of shavings still freshat his feet, that, for him and his work, the former lapse of time hadbeen an illusion, and that no more time had elapsed than is requiredfor a single scintillation from the brain of brahma to fall on andinflame the tinder of a mortal brain.
this alone wears well.
for the most part, we are not wherewe are, but in a false position.
through an infinity of our natures, wesuppose a case, and put ourselves into it, and hence are in two casesat the same time, and it is doubly difficult to get out.
in sanemoments we regard only the facts, the case that is.
say what you haveto say, not what you ought.
tomhyde, the tinker, standing on the gallows, was asked if he had anythingto say.
it is not so bad as you are.
it looks poorest when youare richest.
loveyour life, poor as it is.
i do not see but a quiet mind may live as contentedly there,and have as cheering thoughts, as in a palace.
may be they aresimply great enough to receive without misgiving.
cultivate poverty like a garden herb, like sage.
donot trouble yourself much to get new things, whether clothes orfriends.
sell your clothes and keep your thoughts.
god will see that you do notwant society.
if i were confined to a corner of a garret all my days,like a spider, the world would be just as large to me while i had mythoughts about me.
humility likedarkness reveals the heavenly lights.
itis life near the bone where it is sweetest.
you are defended from beinga trifler.
no man loses ever on a lower level by magnanimity on ahigher.
superfluous wealth can buy superfluities only.
money is notrequired to buy one necessary of the soul.
i live in the angle of a leaden wall, into whose composition was poureda little alloy of bell metal.
it is thenoise of my contemporaries.
they tell me of california and texas, of england andthe indies, of the hon.
god is only the president of the day, and webster is hisorator.
it affords me no satisfaction to commence to spring an arch beforei have got a solid foundation.
thereis a solid bottom every where.
we read that the traveller asked the boyif the swamp before him had a hard bottom.
the boy replied that it had.
only what is thought, said, or done at acertain rare coincidence is good.
give me a hammer, and let me feel for thefurring.
do not depend on the putty.
so will help you god, and so only.
every nail driven shouldbe as another rivet in the machine of the universe, you carrying on thework.
rather than love, than money, than fame, give me truth.
the hospitality was as cold as the ices.
ithought that there was no need of ice to freeze them.
i called on the king, but hemade me wait in his hall, and conducted like a man incapacitated forhospitality.
there was a man in my neighborhood who lived in a hollowtree.
his manners were truly regal.
i should have done better had icalled on him.
these may be but thespring months in the life of the race.
we areacquainted with a mere pellicle of the globe on which we live.
mosthave not delved six feet beneath the surface, nor leaped as many aboveit.
we know not where we are.
beside, we are sound asleep nearly halfour time.
yet we esteem ourselves wise, and have an established orderon the surface.
there is an incessant influx of novelty into the world, and yet wetolerate incredible dulness.
i need only suggest what kind of sermonsare still listened to in the most enlightened countries.
there are suchwords as joy and sorrow, but they are only the burden of a psalm, sungwith a nasal twang, while we believe in the ordinary and mean.
we thinkthat we can change our clothes only.
we do not believe that a tide rises and falls behindevery man which can float the british empire like a chip, if he shouldever harbor it in his mind.
the life in us is like the water in the river.
it was not always dry land where we dwell.
i see far inland the bankswhich the stream anciently washed, before science began to record itsfreshets.
the light which puts out our eyes is darkness to us.
only thatday dawns to which we are awake.
there is more day to dawn.
the sun isbut a morning star.
theobjections which have been brought against a standing army, and theyare many and weighty, and deserve to prevail, may also at last bebrought against a standing government.
the standing army is only an armof the standing government.
the government itself, which is only themode which the people have chosen to execute their will, is equallyliable to be abused and perverted before the people can act through it.
governments show thus howsuccessfully men can be imposed on, even impose on themselves, fortheir own advantage.
let every man make known what kind ofgovernment would command his respect, and that will be one step towardobtaining it.
after all, the practical reason why, when the power is once in thehands of the people, a majority are permitted, and for a long periodcontinue, to rule, is not because they are most likely to be in theright, nor because this seems fairest to the minority, but because theyare physically the strongest.
but a government in which the majorityrule in all cases can not be based on justice, even as far as menunderstand it.
it is not desirable to cultivate a respect for the law, somuch as for the right.
the only obligation which i have a right toassume, is to do at any time what i think right.
such command no more respect than men of straw, or alump of dirt.
they have the same sort of worth only as horses and dogs.
yet such as these even are commonly esteemed good citizens.
but almost all say that such isnot the case now.
at any rate, it is a great evil tomake a stir about it.
but when the friction comes to have its machine,and oppression and robbery are organized, i say, let us not have such amachine any longer.
in other words, when a sixth of the population of anation which has undertaken to be the refuge of liberty are slaves, anda whole country is unjustly overrun and conquered by a foreign army,and subjected to military law, i think that it is not too soon forhonest men to rebel and revolutionize.
what makes this duty the moreurgent is that fact, that the country so overrun is not our own, butours is the invading army.
but paley appears never tohave contemplated those cases to which the rule of expediency does notapply, in which a people, as well as an individual, must do justice,cost what it may.
if i have unjustly wrested a plank from a drowningman, i must restore it to him though i drown myself.
this, according topaley, would be inconvenient.
but he that would save his life, in sucha case, shall lose it.
this people must cease to hold slaves, and tomake war on mexico, though it cost them their existence as a people.
they will wait, well disposed, for others toremedy the evil, that they may no longer have it to regret.
at most,they give only a cheap vote, and a feeble countenance and godspeed, tothe right, as it goes by them.
the character of thevoters is not staked.
i am willingto leave it to the majority.
its obligation, therefore, never exceedsthat of expediency.
it is only expressing to men feebly your desire that it shouldprevail.
a wise man will not leave the right to the mercy of chance,nor wish it to prevail through the power of the majority.
there is butlittle virtue in the action of masses of men.
when the majority shallat length vote for the abolition of slavery, it will be because theyare indifferent to slavery, or because there is but little slavery leftto be abolished by their vote.
his vote is of no more worth than that ofany unprincipled foreigner or hireling native, who may have beenbought.
i must get off him first,that he may pursue his contemplations too.
see what gross inconsistencyis tolerated.
thus, under the name of order and civil government, we are all made atlast to pay homage to and support our own meanness.
the broadest and most prevalent error requires the most disinterestedvirtue to sustain it.
the slight reproach to which the virtue ofpatriotism is commonly liable, the noble are most likely to incur.
those who, while they disapprove of the character and measures of agovernment, yield to it their allegiance and support, are undoubtedlyits most conscientious supporters, and so frequently the most seriousobstacles to reform.
some are petitioning the state to dissolve theunion, to disregard the requisitions of the president.
they think that, if they should resist, theremedy would be worse than the evil.
let yourlife be a counter friction to stop the machine.
what i have to do is tosee, at any rate, that i do not lend myself to the wrong which icondemn.
as for adopting the ways which the state has provided for remedying theevil, i know not of such ways.
i have other affairs to attend to.
i came into thisworld, not chiefly to make this a good place to live in, but to live init, be it good or bad.
so isall change for the better, like birth and death which convulse thebody.
i do not hesitate to say, that those who call themselves abolitionistsshould at once effectually withdraw their support, both in person andproperty, from the government of massachusetts, and not wait till theyconstitute a majority of one, before they suffer the right to prevailthrough them.
i think that it is enough if they have god on their side,without waiting for that other one.
moreover, any man more right thanhis neighbors constitutes a majority of one already.
reformkeeps many scores of newspapers in its service, but not one man.
under a government which imprisons any unjustly, the true place for ajust man is also a prison.
the proper place today, the only place whichmassachusetts has provided for her freer and less desponding spirits,is in her prisons, to be put out and locked out of the state by her ownact, as they have already put themselves out by their principles.
if any thinkthat their influence would be lost there, and their voices no longerafflict the ear of the state, that they would not be as an enemy withinits walls, they do not know by how much truth is stronger than error,nor how much more eloquently and effectively he can combat injusticewho has experienced a little in his own person.
cast your whole vote,not a strip of paper merely, but your whole influence.
if thealternative is to keep all just men in prison, or give up war andslavery, the state will not hesitate which to choose.
this is, in fact, thedefinition of a peaceable revolution, if any such is possible.
but even suppose blood should flow.
i see this blood flowing now.
to such the state renders comparatively small service, and aslight tax is wont to appear exorbitant, particularly if they areobliged to earn it by special labor with their hands.
if there were onewho lived wholly without the use of money, the state itself wouldhesitate to demand it of him.
thus his moral ground is taken from under his feet.
the best thing a man can do for his culturewhen he is rich is to endeavor to carry out those schemes which heentertained when he was poor.
christ answered the herodians accordingto their condition.
when i converse with the freest of my neighbors, i perceive that,whatever they may say about the magnitude and seriousness of thequestion, and their regard for the public tranquillity, the long andthe short of the matter is, that they cannot spare the protection ofthe existing government, and they dread the consequences ofdisobedience to it to their property and families.
for my own part, ishould not like to think that i ever rely on the protection of thestate.
this makes it impossible fora man to live honestly and at the same time comfortably in outwardrespects.
you must hire or squat somewhere, and raisebut a small crop, and eat that soon.
you must live within yourself, anddepend upon yourself, always tucked up and ready for a start, and nothave many affairs.
a man may grow rich in turkey even, if he will be inall respects a good subject of the turkish government.
it costs me less in every sense to incur the penaltyof disobedience to the state, than it would to obey.
i should feel asif i were worth less in that case.
some years ago, the state met me in behalf of the church, and commandedme to pay a certain sum toward the support of a clergyman whosepreaching my father attended, but never i myself.
but, unfortunately,another man saw fit to pay it.
iwondered that it should have concluded at length that this was the bestuse it could put me to, and had never thought to avail itself of myservices in some way.
i saw that, if there was a wall of stone betweenme and my townsmen, there was a still more difficult one to climb orbreak through, before they could get to be as free as i was.
i did norfor a moment feel confined, and the walls seemed a great waste of stoneand mortar.
i felt as if i alone of all my townsmen had paid my tax.
they plainly did not know how to treat me, but behaved like persons whoare underbred.
it is not armedwith superior wit or honesty, but with superior physical strength.
iwas not born to be forced.
i will breathe after my own fashion.
let ussee who is the strongest.
they force me to become likethemselves.
it is not worth the while to snivel about it.
i am not responsible forthe successful working of the machinery of society.
i am not the son ofthe engineer.
i perceive that, when an acorn and a chestnut fall sideby side, the one does not remain inert to make way for the other, butboth obey their own laws, and spring and grow and flourish as best theycan, till one, perchance, overshadows and destroys the other.
the night in prison was novel and interesting enough.
probably this is the onlyhouse in the town where verses are composed, which are afterwardprinted in a circular form, but not published.
i was shown quite a longlist of verses which were composed by some young men who had beendetected in an attempt to escape, who avenged themselves by singingthem.
it was like travelling into a far country, such as i had never expectedto behold, to lie there for one night.
it was to see my native village in the light of the middleages, and our concord was turned into a rhine stream, and visions ofknights and castles passed before me.
they were the voices of oldburghers that i heard in the streets.
it was acloser view of my native town.
i was fairly inside of it.
i never hadseen its institutions before.
i began to comprehend what its inhabitants wereabout.
i saw yetmore distinctly the state in which i lived.
i simply wish to refuse allegiance to the state, to withdraw andstand aloof from it effectually.
in fact, i quietly declare war with the state, aftermy fashion, though i will still make use and get what advantages of heri can, as is usual in such cases.
if others pay the tax which is demanded of me, from a sympathy with thestate, they do but what they have already done in their own case, orrather they abet injustice to a greater extent than the state requires.
if they pay the tax from a mistaken interest in the individual taxed,to save his property or prevent his going to jail, it is because theyhave not considered wisely how far they let their private feelingsinterfere with the public good.
this, then, is my position at present.
but one cannot be too much onhis guard in such a case, lest his actions be biassed by obstinacy, oran undue regard for the opinions of men.
let him see that he does onlywhat belongs to himself and to the hour.
you do not put your head into thefire.
but just in proportion as i regard this as not wholly a bruteforce, but partly a human force, and consider that i have relations tothose millions as to so many millions of men, and not of mere brute orinanimate things, i see that appeal is possible, first andinstantaneously, from them to the maker of them, and, secondly, fromthem to themselves.
but, if i put my head deliberately into the fire,there is no appeal to fire or to the maker of fire, and i have onlymyself to blame.
if i could convince myself that i have any right to besatisfied with men as they are, and to treat them accordingly, and notaccording, in some respects, to my requisitions and expectations ofwhat they and i ought to be, then, like a good mussulman and fatalist,i should endeavor to be satisfied with things as they are, and say itis the will of god.
i do not wish to quarrel with any man or nation.
i do not wish to splithairs, to make fine distinctions, or set myself up as better than myneighbors.
i seek rather, i may say, even an excuse for conforming tothe laws of the land.
i am but too ready to conform to them.
it is not many moments that i liveunder a government, even in this world.
statesmen and legislators,standing so completely within the institution, never distinctly andnakedly behold it.
they are wont toforget that the world is not governed by policy and expediency.
websternever goes behind government, and so cannot speak with authority aboutit.
yet,compared with the cheap professions of most reformers, and the stillcheaper wisdom and eloquence of politicians in general, his are almostthe only sensible and valuable words, and we thank heaven for him.
comparatively, he is always strong, original, and, above all,practical.
still his quality is not wisdom, but prudence.
he well deservesto be called, as he has been called, the defender of the constitution.
there are really no blows to be given by him but defensive ones.
he isnot a leader, but a follower.
associations formed elsewhere,springing from a feeling of humanity, or any other cause, have nothingwhatever to do with it.
they have never received any encouragement fromme and they never will.
no man with a genius for legislation has appeared in america.
they arerare in the history of the world.
we love eloquence for its own sake, and not for any truthwhich it may utter, or any heroism it may inspire.
they have no genius or talent forcomparatively humble questions of taxation and finance, commerce andmanufactures and agriculture.
if we were left solely to the wordy witof legislators in congress for our guidance, uncorrected by theseasonable experience and the effectual complaints of the people,america would not long retain her rank among the nations.
it can have no pure right over my person andproperty but what i concede to it.
the progress from an absolute to alimited monarchy, from a limited monarchy to a democracy, is a progresstoward a true respect for the individual.
even the chinese philosopherwas wise enough to regard the individual as the basis of the empire.
a state which bore this kind of fruit, and suffered it todrop off as fast as it ripened, would prepare the way for a still moreperfect and glorious state, which also i have imagined, but not yetanywhere seen.
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.
project gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receivespecific permission.
if you do not charge anything for copies of thisebook, complying with the rules is very easy.
you may use this ebookfor nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,performances and research.
redistribution is subject to thetrademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
it may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the unitedstates.
if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theunited states and you are located in the united states, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to project gutenberg are removed.
the copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work.
copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change.
the foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry outside the united states.
you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form.
project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by u.
you agree that the foundation, thetrademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not beliable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive orincidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of suchdamage.
if youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation.
the person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund.
if you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.
some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law.
the invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.
itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.
contributions to the project gutenberg literaryarchive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byu.
compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements.
we do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
to senddonations or determine the status of compliance for any particularstate visit www.
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the united states.
laws alone swamp our small staff.
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses.
donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
professor michael s.
unless a copyright notice is included.
thus, we do notnecessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.
